the ﻿the project project gutenberg gutenberg ebook ebook of of david david copperfield, copperfield, by by charles charles dickens dickens this this ebook ebook is is for for the the use use of of anyone anyone anywhere anywhere at at no no cost cost and and with with almost almost no no restrictions restrictions whatsoever. whatsoever. you may may copy copy it, it, give give it it away away or or re-use re-use it it under under the the terms terms of of the the project project gutenberg gutenberg license license included included with with this this ebook ebook or or online online at at www.gutenberg.org www.gutenberg.org title: title: david david copperfield copperfield author: author: charles charles dickens dickens release release date: date: december, december, 1996 1996 [etext [etext #766] #766] posting posting date: date: november november 24, 24, 2009 2009 [last [last updated: updated: march march 11, 11, 2013] 2013] language: language: english english *** *** start start of of this this project project gutenberg gutenberg ebook ebook david david copperfield copperfield *** *** produced produced by by jo jo churcher churcher david david copperfield copperfield by by charles charles dickens dickens affectionately affectionately inscribed inscribed to to the the hon. hon. mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. richard richard watson, watson, of of rockingham, rockingham, northamptonshire. northamptonshire. contents contents i. i. i i am am born born ii. ii. i i observe observe iii. iii. i i have have a a change change iv. iv. i i fall fall into into disgrace disgrace v. v. i i am am sent sent away away vi. vi. i i enlarge enlarge my my circle circle of of acquaintance acquaintance vii. vii. my my 'first 'first half' half' at at salem salem house house viii. viii. my my holidays. holidays. especially especially one one happy happy afternoon afternoon ix. ix. i i have have a a memorable memorable birthday birthday x. x. i i become become neglected, neglected, and and am am provided provided for for xi. xi. i i begin begin life life on on my my own own account, account, and and don't don't like like it it xii. xii. liking liking life life on on my my own own account account no no better, better, i i form form a a great great resolution resolution xiii. xiii. the the sequel sequel of of my my resolution resolution xiv. xiv. my my aunt aunt makes makes up up her her mind mind about about me me xv. xv. i i make make another another beginning beginning xvi. xvi. i i am am a a new new boy boy in in more more senses senses than than one one xvii. xvii. somebody somebody turns turns up up xviii. xviii. a a retrospect retrospect xix. xix. i i look look about about me me and and make make a a discovery discovery xx. xx. steerforth's steerforth's home home xxi. xxi. little little em'ly em'ly xxii. xxii. some some old old scenes, scenes, and and some some new new people people xxiii. xxiii. i i corroborate corroborate mr. mr. dick, dick, and and choose choose a a profession profession xxiv. xxiv. my my first first dissipation dissipation xxv. xxv. good good and and bad bad angels angels xxvi. xxvi. i i fall fall into into captivity captivity xxvii. xxvii. tommy tommy traddles traddles xxviii. xxviii. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's gauntlet gauntlet xxix. xxix. i i visit visit steerforth steerforth at at his his home, home, again again xxx. xxx. a a loss loss xxxi. xxxi. a a greater greater loss loss xxxii. xxxii. the the beginning beginning of of a a long long journey journey xxxiii. xxxiii. blissful blissful xxxiv. xxxiv. my my aunt aunt astonishes astonishes me me xxxv. xxxv. depression depression xxxvi. xxxvi. enthusiasm enthusiasm xxxvii. xxxvii. a a little little cold cold water water xxxviii. xxxviii. a a dissolution dissolution of of partnership partnership xxxix. xxxix. wickfield wickfield and and heep heep xl. xl. the the wanderer wanderer xli. xli. dora's dora's aunts aunts xlii. xlii. mischief mischief xliii. xliii. another another retrospect retrospect xliv. xliv. our our housekeeping housekeeping xlv. xlv. mr. mr. dick dick fulfils fulfils my my aunt's aunt's predictions predictions xlvi. xlvi. intelligence intelligence xlvii. xlvii. martha martha xlviii. xlviii. domestic domestic xlix. xlix. i i am am involved involved in in mystery mystery l. l. mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's dream dream comes comes true true li. li. the the beginning beginning of of a a longer longer journey journey lii. lii. i i assist assist at at an an explosion explosion liii. liii. another another retrospect retrospect liv. liv. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's transactions transactions lv. lv. tempest tempest lvi. lvi. the the new new wound, wound, and and the the old old lvii. lvii. the the emigrants emigrants lviii. lviii. absence absence lix. lix. return return lx. lx. agnes agnes lxi. lxi. i i am am shown shown two two interesting interesting penitents penitents lxii. lxii. a a light light shines shines on on my my way way lxiii. lxiii. a a visitor visitor lxiv. lxiv. a a last last retrospect retrospect preface preface to to 1850 1850 edition edition i i do do not not find find it it easy easy to to get get sufficiently sufficiently far far away away from from this this book, book, in in the the first first sensations sensations of of having having finished finished it, it, to to refer refer to to it it with with the the composure composure which which this this formal formal heading heading would would seem seem to to require. require. my my interest interest in in it, it, is is so so recent recent and and strong; strong; and and my my mind mind is is so so divided divided between between pleasure pleasure and and regret regret -- -- pleasure pleasure in in the the achievement achievement of of a a long long design, design, regret regret in in the the separation separation from from many many companions companions -- -- that that i i am am in in danger danger of of wearying wearying the the reader reader whom whom i i love, love, with with personal personal confidences, confidences, and and private private emotions. emotions. besides besides which, which, all all that that i i could could say say of of the the story, story, to to any any purpose, purpose, i i have have endeavoured endeavoured to to say say in in it. it. it it would would concern concern the the reader reader little, little, perhaps, perhaps, to to know, know, how how sorrowfully sorrowfully the the pen pen is is laid laid down down at at the the close close of of a a two-years' two-years' imaginative imaginative task; task; or or how how an an author author feels feels as as if if he he were were dismissing dismissing some some portion portion of of himself himself into into the the shadowy shadowy world, world, when when a a crowd crowd of of the the creatures creatures of of his his brain brain are are going going from from him him for for ever. ever. yet, yet, i i have have nothing nothing else else to to tell; tell; unless, unless, indeed, indeed, i i were were to to confess confess (which (which might might be be of of less less moment moment still) still) that that no no one one can can ever ever believe believe this this narrative, narrative, in in the the reading, reading, more more than than i i have have believed believed it it in in the the writing. writing. instead instead of of looking looking back, back, therefore, therefore, i i will will look look forward. forward. i i cannot cannot close close this this volume volume more more agreeably agreeably to to myself, myself, than than with with a a hopeful hopeful glance glance towards towards the the time time when when i i shall shall again again put put forth forth my my two two green green leaves leaves once once a a month, month, and and with with a a faithful faithful remembrance remembrance of of the the genial genial sun sun and and showers showers that that have have fallen fallen on on these these leaves leaves of of david david copperfield, copperfield, and and made made me me happy. happy. london, london, october, october, 1850. 1850. preface preface to to the the charles charles dickens dickens edition edition i i remarked remarked in in the the original original preface preface to to this this book, book, that that i i did did not not find find it it easy easy to to get get sufficiently sufficiently far far away away from from it, it, in in the the first first sensations sensations of of having having finished finished it, it, to to refer refer to to it it with with the the composure composure which which this this formal formal heading heading would would seem seem to to require. require. my my interest interest in in it it was was so so recent recent and and strong, strong, and and my my mind mind was was so so divided divided between between pleasure pleasure and and regret regret -- -- pleasure pleasure in in the the achievement achievement of of a a long long design, design, regret regret in in the the separation separation from from many many companions companions -- -- that that i i was was in in danger danger of of wearying wearying the the reader reader with with personal personal confidences confidences and and private private emotions. emotions. besides besides which, which, all all that that i i could could have have said said of of the the story story to to any any purpose, purpose, i i had had endeavoured endeavoured to to say say in in it. it. it it would would concern concern the the reader reader little, little, perhaps, perhaps, to to know know how how sorrowfully sorrowfully the the pen pen is is laid laid down down at at the the close close of of a a two-years' two-years' imaginative imaginative task; task; or or how how an an author author feels feels as as if if he he were were dismissing dismissing some some portion portion of of himself himself into into the the shadowy shadowy world, world, when when a a crowd crowd of of the the creatures creatures of of his his brain brain are are going going from from him him for for ever. ever. yet, yet, i i had had nothing nothing else else to to tell; tell; unless, unless, indeed, indeed, i i were were to to confess confess (which (which might might be be of of less less moment moment still), still), that that no no one one can can ever ever believe believe this this narrative, narrative, in in the the reading, reading, more more than than i i believed believed it it in in the the writing. writing. so so true true are are these these avowals avowals at at the the present present day, day, that that i i can can now now only only take take the the reader reader into into one one confidence confidence more. more. of of all all my my books, books, i i like like this this the the best. best. it it will will be be easily easily believed believed that that i i am am a a fond fond parent parent to to every every child child of of my my fancy, fancy, and and that that no no one one can can ever ever love love that that family family as as dearly dearly as as i i love love them. them. but, but, like like many many fond fond parents, parents, i i have have in in my my heart heart of of hearts hearts a a favourite favourite child. child. and and his his name name is is david david copperfield. copperfield. 1869 1869 the the personal personal history history and and experience experience of of david david copperfield copperfield the the younger younger chapter chapter 1. 1. i i am am born born whether whether i i shall shall turn turn out out to to be be the the hero hero of of my my own own life, life, or or whether whether that that station station will will be be held held by by anybody anybody else, else, these these pages pages must must show. show. to to begin begin my my life life with with the the beginning beginning of of my my life, life, i i record record that that i i was was born born (as (as i i have have been been informed informed and and believe) believe) on on a a friday, friday, at at twelve twelve o'clock o'clock at at night. night. it it was was remarked remarked that that the the clock clock began began to to strike, strike, and and i i began began to to cry, cry, simultaneously. simultaneously. in in consideration consideration of of the the day day and and hour hour of of my my birth, birth, it it was was declared declared by by the the nurse, nurse, and and by by some some sage sage women women in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood who who had had taken taken a a lively lively interest interest in in me me several several months months before before there there was was any any possibility possibility of of our our becoming becoming personally personally acquainted, acquainted, first, first, that that i i was was destined destined to to be be unlucky unlucky in in life; life; and and secondly, secondly, that that i i was was privileged privileged to to see see ghosts ghosts and and spirits; spirits; both both these these gifts gifts inevitably inevitably attaching, attaching, as as they they believed, believed, to to all all unlucky unlucky infants infants of of either either gender, gender, born born towards towards the the small small hours hours on on a a friday friday night. night. i i need need say say nothing nothing here, here, on on the the first first head, head, because because nothing nothing can can show show better better than than my my history history whether whether that that prediction prediction was was verified verified or or falsified falsified by by the the result. result. on on the the second second branch branch of of the the question, question, i i will will only only remark, remark, that that unless unless i i ran ran through through that that part part of of my my inheritance inheritance while while i i was was still still a a baby, baby, i i have have not not come come into into it it yet. yet. but but i i do do not not at at all all complain complain of of having having been been kept kept out out of of this this property; property; and and if if anybody anybody else else should should be be in in the the present present enjoyment enjoyment of of it, it, he he is is heartily heartily welcome welcome to to keep keep it. it. i i was was born born with with a a caul, caul, which which was was advertised advertised for for sale, sale, in in the the newspapers, newspapers, at at the the low low price price of of fifteen fifteen guineas. guineas. whether whether sea-going sea-going people people were were short short of of money money about about that that time, time, or or were were short short of of faith faith and and preferred preferred cork cork jackets, jackets, i i don't don't know; know; all all i i know know is, is, that that there there was was but but one one solitary solitary bidding, bidding, and and that that was was from from an an attorney attorney connected connected with with the the bill-broking bill-broking business, business, who who offered offered two two pounds pounds in in cash, cash, and and the the balance balance in in sherry, sherry, but but declined declined to to be be guaranteed guaranteed from from drowning drowning on on any any higher higher bargain. bargain. consequently consequently the the advertisement advertisement was was withdrawn withdrawn at at a a dead dead loss loss -- -- for for as as to to sherry, sherry, my my poor poor dear dear mother's mother's own own sherry sherry was was in in the the market market then then -- -- and and ten ten years years afterwards, afterwards, the the caul caul was was put put up up in in a a raffle raffle down down in in our our part part of of the the country, country, to to fifty fifty members members at at half-a-crown half-a-crown a a head, head, the the winner winner to to spend spend five five shillings. shillings. i i was was present present myself, myself, and and i i remember remember to to have have felt felt quite quite uncomfortable uncomfortable and and confused, confused, at at a a part part of of myself myself being being disposed disposed of of in in that that way. way. the the caul caul was was won, won, i i recollect, recollect, by by an an old old lady lady with with a a hand-basket, hand-basket, who, who, very very reluctantly, reluctantly, produced produced from from it it the the stipulated stipulated five five shillings, shillings, all all in in halfpence, halfpence, and and twopence twopence halfpenny halfpenny short short -- -- as as it it took took an an immense immense time time and and a a great great waste waste of of arithmetic, arithmetic, to to endeavour endeavour without without any any effect effect to to prove prove to to her. her. it it is is a a fact fact which which will will be be long long remembered remembered as as remarkable remarkable down down there, there, that that she she was was never never drowned, drowned, but but died died triumphantly triumphantly in in bed, bed, at at ninety-two. ninety-two. i i have have understood understood that that it it was, was, to to the the last, last, her her proudest proudest boast, boast, that that she she never never had had been been on on the the water water in in her her life, life, except except upon upon a a bridge; bridge; and and that that over over her her tea tea (to (to which which she she was was extremely extremely partial) partial) she, she, to to the the last, last, expressed expressed her her indignation indignation at at the the impiety impiety of of mariners mariners and and others, others, who who had had the the presumption presumption to to go go 'meandering' 'meandering' about about the the world. world. it it was was in in vain vain to to represent represent to to her her that that some some conveniences, conveniences, tea tea perhaps perhaps included, included, resulted resulted from from this this objectionable objectionable practice. practice. she she always always returned, returned, with with greater greater emphasis emphasis and and with with an an instinctive instinctive knowledge knowledge of of the the strength strength of of her her objection, objection, 'let 'let us us have have no no meandering.' meandering.' not not to to meander meander myself, myself, at at present, present, i i will will go go back back to to my my birth. birth. i i was was born born at at blunderstone, blunderstone, in in suffolk, suffolk, or or 'there 'there by', by', as as they they say say in in scotland. scotland. i i was was a a posthumous posthumous child. child. my my father's father's eyes eyes had had closed closed upon upon the the light light of of this this world world six six months, months, when when mine mine opened opened on on it. it. there there is is something something strange strange to to me, me, even even now, now, in in the the reflection reflection that that he he never never saw saw me; me; and and something something stranger stranger yet yet in in the the shadowy shadowy remembrance remembrance that that i i have have of of my my first first childish childish associations associations with with his his white white grave-stone grave-stone in in the the churchyard, churchyard, and and of of the the indefinable indefinable compassion compassion i i used used to to feel feel for for it it lying lying out out alone alone there there in in the the dark dark night, night, when when our our little little parlour parlour was was warm warm and and bright bright with with fire fire and and candle, candle, and and the the doors doors of of our our house house were were -- -- almost almost cruelly, cruelly, it it seemed seemed to to me me sometimes sometimes -- -- bolted bolted and and locked locked against against it. it. an an aunt aunt of of my my father's, father's, and and consequently consequently a a great-aunt great-aunt of of mine, mine, of of whom whom i i shall shall have have more more to to relate relate by by and and by, by, was was the the principal principal magnate magnate of of our our family. family. miss miss trotwood, trotwood, or or miss miss betsey, betsey, as as my my poor poor mother mother always always called called her, her, when when she she sufficiently sufficiently overcame overcame her her dread dread of of this this formidable formidable personage personage to to mention mention her her at at all all (which (which was was seldom), seldom), had had been been married married to to a a husband husband younger younger than than herself, herself, who who was was very very handsome, handsome, except except in in the the sense sense of of the the homely homely adage, adage, 'handsome 'handsome is, is, that that handsome handsome does' does' -- -- for for he he was was strongly strongly suspected suspected of of having having beaten beaten miss miss betsey, betsey, and and even even of of having having once, once, on on a a disputed disputed question question of of supplies, supplies, made made some some hasty hasty but but determined determined arrangements arrangements to to throw throw her her out out of of a a two two pair pair of of stairs' stairs' window. window. these these evidences evidences of of an an incompatibility incompatibility of of temper temper induced induced miss miss betsey betsey to to pay pay him him off, off, and and effect effect a a separation separation by by mutual mutual consent. consent. he he went went to to india india with with his his capital, capital, and and there, there, according according to to a a wild wild legend legend in in our our family, family, he he was was once once seen seen riding riding on on an an elephant, elephant, in in company company with with a a baboon; baboon; but but i i think think it it must must have have been been a a baboo baboo -- -- or or a a begum. begum. anyhow, anyhow, from from india india tidings tidings of of his his death death reached reached home, home, within within ten ten years. years. how how they they affected affected my my aunt, aunt, nobody nobody knew; knew; for for immediately immediately upon upon the the separation, separation, she she took took her her maiden maiden name name again, again, bought bought a a cottage cottage in in a a hamlet hamlet on on the the sea-coast sea-coast a a long long way way off, off, established established herself herself there there as as a a single single woman woman with with one one servant, servant, and and was was understood understood to to live live secluded, secluded, ever ever afterwards, afterwards, in in an an inflexible inflexible retirement. retirement. my my father father had had once once been been a a favourite favourite of of hers, hers, i i believe; believe; but but she she was was mortally mortally affronted affronted by by his his marriage, marriage, on on the the ground ground that that my my mother mother was was 'a 'a wax wax doll'. doll'. she she had had never never seen seen my my mother, mother, but but she she knew knew her her to to be be not not yet yet twenty. twenty. my my father father and and miss miss betsey betsey never never met met again. again. he he was was double double my my mother's mother's age age when when he he married, married, and and of of but but a a delicate delicate constitution. constitution. he he died died a a year year afterwards, afterwards, and, and, as as i i have have said, said, six six months months before before i i came came into into the the world. world. this this was was the the state state of of matters, matters, on on the the afternoon afternoon of, of, what what i i may may be be excused excused for for calling, calling, that that eventful eventful and and important important friday. friday. i i can can make make no no claim claim therefore therefore to to have have known, known, at at that that time, time, how how matters matters stood; stood; or or to to have have any any remembrance, remembrance, founded founded on on the the evidence evidence of of my my own own senses, senses, of of what what follows. follows. my my mother mother was was sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, but but poorly poorly in in health, health, and and very very low low in in spirits, spirits, looking looking at at it it through through her her tears, tears, and and desponding desponding heavily heavily about about herself herself and and the the fatherless fatherless little little stranger, stranger, who who was was already already welcomed welcomed by by some some grosses grosses of of prophetic prophetic pins, pins, in in a a drawer drawer upstairs, upstairs, to to a a world world not not at at all all excited excited on on the the subject subject of of his his arrival; arrival; my my mother, mother, i i say, say, was was sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, that that bright, bright, windy windy march march afternoon, afternoon, very very timid timid and and sad, sad, and and very very doubtful doubtful of of ever ever coming coming alive alive out out of of the the trial trial that that was was before before her, her, when, when, lifting lifting her her eyes eyes as as she she dried dried them, them, to to the the window window opposite, opposite, she she saw saw a a strange strange lady lady coming coming up up the the garden. garden. my my mother mother had had a a sure sure foreboding foreboding at at the the second second glance, glance, that that it it was was miss miss betsey. betsey. the the setting setting sun sun was was glowing glowing on on the the strange strange lady, lady, over over the the garden-fence, garden-fence, and and she she came came walking walking up up to to the the door door with with a a fell fell rigidity rigidity of of figure figure and and composure composure of of countenance countenance that that could could have have belonged belonged to to nobody nobody else. else. when when she she reached reached the the house, house, she she gave gave another another proof proof of of her her identity. identity. my my father father had had often often hinted hinted that that she she seldom seldom conducted conducted herself herself like like any any ordinary ordinary christian; christian; and and now, now, instead instead of of ringing ringing the the bell, bell, she she came came and and looked looked in in at at that that identical identical window, window, pressing pressing the the end end of of her her nose nose against against the the glass glass to to that that extent, extent, that that my my poor poor dear dear mother mother used used to to say say it it became became perfectly perfectly flat flat and and white white in in a a moment. moment. she she gave gave my my mother mother such such a a turn, turn, that that i i have have always always been been convinced convinced i i am am indebted indebted to to miss miss betsey betsey for for having having been been born born on on a a friday. friday. my my mother mother had had left left her her chair chair in in her her agitation, agitation, and and gone gone behind behind it it in in the the corner. corner. miss miss betsey, betsey, looking looking round round the the room, room, slowly slowly and and inquiringly, inquiringly, began began on on the the other other side, side, and and carried carried her her eyes eyes on, on, like like a a saracen's saracen's head head in in a a dutch dutch clock, clock, until until they they reached reached my my mother. mother. then then she she made made a a frown frown and and a a gesture gesture to to my my mother, mother, like like one one who who was was accustomed accustomed to to be be obeyed, obeyed, to to come come and and open open the the door. door. my my mother mother went. went. 'mrs. 'mrs. david david copperfield, copperfield, i i think,' think,' said said miss miss betsey; betsey; the the emphasis emphasis referring, referring, perhaps, perhaps, to to my my mother's mother's mourning mourning weeds, weeds, and and her her condition. condition. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said my my mother, mother, faintly. faintly. 'miss 'miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said the the visitor. visitor. 'you have have heard heard of of her, her, i i dare dare say?' say?' my my mother mother answered answered she she had had had had that that pleasure. pleasure. and and she she had had a a disagreeable disagreeable consciousness consciousness of of not not appearing appearing to to imply imply that that it it had had been been an an overpowering overpowering pleasure. pleasure. 'now 'now you see see her,' her,' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. my my mother mother bent bent her her head, head, and and begged begged her her to to walk walk in. in. they they went went into into the the parlour parlour my my mother mother had had come come from, from, the the fire fire in in the the best best room room on on the the other other side side of of the the passage passage not not being being lighted lighted -- -- not not having having been been lighted, lighted, indeed, indeed, since since my my father's father's funeral; funeral; and and when when they they were were both both seated, seated, and and miss miss betsey betsey said said nothing, nothing, my my mother, mother, after after vainly vainly trying trying to to restrain restrain herself, herself, began began to to cry. cry. 'oh 'oh tut, tut, tut, tut, tut!' tut!' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, in in a a hurry. hurry. 'don't 'don't do do that! that! come, come, come!' come!' my my mother mother couldn't couldn't help help it it notwithstanding, notwithstanding, so so she she cried cried until until she she had had had had her her cry cry out. out. 'take 'take off off your your cap, cap, child,' child,' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, 'and 'and let let me me see see you.' my my mother mother was was too too much much afraid afraid of of her her to to refuse refuse compliance compliance with with this this odd odd request, request, if if she she had had any any disposition disposition to to do do so. so. therefore therefore she she did did as as she she was was told, told, and and did did it it with with such such nervous nervous hands hands that that her her hair hair (which (which was was luxuriant luxuriant and and beautiful) beautiful) fell fell all all about about her her face. face. 'why, 'why, bless bless my my heart!' heart!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss betsey. betsey. 'you are are a a very very baby!' baby!' my my mother mother was, was, no no doubt, doubt, unusually unusually youthful youthful in in appearance appearance even even for for her her years; years; she she hung hung her her head, head, as as if if it it were were her her fault, fault, poor poor thing, thing, and and said, said, sobbing, sobbing, that that indeed indeed she she was was afraid afraid she she was was but but a a childish childish widow, widow, and and would would be be but but a a childish childish mother mother if if she she lived. lived. in in a a short short pause pause which which ensued, ensued, she she had had a a fancy fancy that that she she felt felt miss miss betsey betsey touch touch her her hair, hair, and and that that with with no no ungentle ungentle hand; hand; but, but, looking looking at at her, her, in in her her timid timid hope, hope, she she found found that that lady lady sitting sitting with with the the skirt skirt of of her her dress dress tucked tucked up, up, her her hands hands folded folded on on one one knee, knee, and and her her feet feet upon upon the the fender, fender, frowning frowning at at the the fire. fire. 'in 'in the the name name of of heaven,' heaven,' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, suddenly, suddenly, 'why 'why rookery?' rookery?' 'do 'do you mean mean the the house, house, ma'am?' ma'am?' asked asked my my mother. mother. 'why 'why rookery?' rookery?' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'cookery 'cookery would would have have been been more more to to the the purpose, purpose, if if you had had had had any any practical practical ideas ideas of of life, life, either either of of you.' 'the 'the name name was was mr. mr. copperfield's copperfield's choice,' choice,' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'when 'when he he bought bought the the house, house, he he liked liked to to think think that that there there were were rooks rooks about about it.' it.' the the evening evening wind wind made made such such a a disturbance disturbance just just now, now, among among some some tall tall old old elm-trees elm-trees at at the the bottom bottom of of the the garden, garden, that that neither neither my my mother mother nor nor miss miss betsey betsey could could forbear forbear glancing glancing that that way. way. as as the the elms elms bent bent to to one one another, another, like like giants giants who who were were whispering whispering secrets, secrets, and and after after a a few few seconds seconds of of such such repose, repose, fell fell into into a a violent violent flurry, flurry, tossing tossing their their wild wild arms arms about, about, as as if if their their late late confidences confidences were were really really too too wicked wicked for for their their peace peace of of mind, mind, some some weatherbeaten weatherbeaten ragged ragged old old rooks'-nests, rooks'-nests, burdening burdening their their higher higher branches, branches, swung swung like like wrecks wrecks upon upon a a stormy stormy sea. sea. 'where 'where are are the the birds?' birds?' asked asked miss miss betsey. betsey. 'the 'the -- -- ?' ?' my my mother mother had had been been thinking thinking of of something something else. else. 'the 'the rooks rooks -- -- what what has has become become of of them?' them?' asked asked miss miss betsey. betsey. 'there 'there have have not not been been any any since since we we have have lived lived here,' here,' said said my my mother. mother. 'we 'we thought thought -- -- mr. mr. copperfield copperfield thought thought -- -- it it was was quite quite a a large large rookery; rookery; but but the the nests nests were were very very old old ones, ones, and and the the birds birds have have deserted deserted them them a a long long while.' while.' 'david 'david copperfield copperfield all all over!' over!' cried cried miss miss betsey. betsey. 'david 'david copperfield copperfield from from head head to to foot! foot! calls calls a a house house a a rookery rookery when when there's there's not not a a rook rook near near it, it, and and takes takes the the birds birds on on trust, trust, because because he he sees sees the the nests!' nests!' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned my my mother, mother, 'is 'is dead, dead, and and if if you dare dare to to speak speak unkindly unkindly of of him him to to me me -- -- ' ' my my poor poor dear dear mother, mother, i i suppose, suppose, had had some some momentary momentary intention intention of of committing committing an an assault assault and and battery battery upon upon my my aunt, aunt, who who could could easily easily have have settled settled her her with with one one hand, hand, even even if if my my mother mother had had been been in in far far better better training training for for such such an an encounter encounter than than she she was was that that evening. evening. but but it it passed passed with with the the action action of of rising rising from from her her chair; chair; and and she she sat sat down down again again very very meekly, meekly, and and fainted. fainted. when when she she came came to to herself, herself, or or when when miss miss betsey betsey had had restored restored her, her, whichever whichever it it was, was, she she found found the the latter latter standing standing at at the the window. window. the the twilight twilight was was by by this this time time shading shading down down into into darkness; darkness; and and dimly dimly as as they they saw saw each each other, other, they they could could not not have have done done that that without without the the aid aid of of the the fire. fire. 'well?' 'well?' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, coming coming back back to to her her chair, chair, as as if if she she had had only only been been taking taking a a casual casual look look at at the the prospect; prospect; 'and 'and when when do do you expect expect -- -- ' ' 'i 'i am am all all in in a a tremble,' tremble,' faltered faltered my my mother. mother. 'i 'i don't don't know know what's what's the the matter. matter. i i shall shall die, die, i i am am sure!' sure!' 'no, 'no, no, no, no,' no,' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'have 'have some some tea.' tea.' 'oh 'oh dear dear me, me, dear dear me, me, do do you think think it it will will do do me me any any good?' good?' cried cried my my mother mother in in a a helpless helpless manner. manner. 'of 'of course course it it will,' will,' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'it's 'it's nothing nothing but but fancy. fancy. what what do do you call call your your girl?' girl?' 'i 'i don't don't know know that that it it will will be be a a girl, girl, yet, yet, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my mother mother innocently. innocently. 'bless 'bless the the baby!' baby!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss betsey, betsey, unconsciously unconsciously quoting quoting the the second second sentiment sentiment of of the the pincushion pincushion in in the the drawer drawer upstairs, upstairs, but but applying applying it it to to my my mother mother instead instead of of me, me, 'i 'i don't don't mean mean that. that. i i mean mean your your servant-girl.' servant-girl.' 'peggotty,' 'peggotty,' said said my my mother. mother. 'peggotty!' 'peggotty!' repeated repeated miss miss betsey, betsey, with with some some indignation. indignation. 'do 'do you mean mean to to say, say, child, child, that that any any human human being being has has gone gone into into a a christian christian church, church, and and got got herself herself named named peggotty?' peggotty?' 'it's 'it's her her surname,' surname,' said said my my mother, mother, faintly. faintly. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield copperfield called called her her by by it, it, because because her her christian christian name name was was the the same same as as mine.' mine.' 'here! 'here! peggotty!' peggotty!' cried cried miss miss betsey, betsey, opening opening the the parlour parlour door. door. 'tea. 'tea. your your mistress mistress is is a a little little unwell. unwell. don't don't dawdle.' dawdle.' having having issued issued this this mandate mandate with with as as much much potentiality potentiality as as if if she she had had been been a a recognized recognized authority authority in in the the house house ever ever since since it it had had been been a a house, house, and and having having looked looked out out to to confront confront the the amazed amazed peggotty peggotty coming coming along along the the passage passage with with a a candle candle at at the the sound sound of of a a strange strange voice, voice, miss miss betsey betsey shut shut the the door door again, again, and and sat sat down down as as before: before: with with her her feet feet on on the the fender, fender, the the skirt skirt of of her her dress dress tucked tucked up, up, and and her her hands hands folded folded on on one one knee. knee. 'you were were speaking speaking about about its its being being a a girl,' girl,' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'i 'i have have no no doubt doubt it it will will be be a a girl. girl. i i have have a a presentiment presentiment that that it it must must be be a a girl. girl. now now child, child, from from the the moment moment of of the the birth birth of of this this girl girl -- -- ' ' 'perhaps 'perhaps boy,' boy,' my my mother mother took took the the liberty liberty of of putting putting in. in. 'i 'i tell tell you i i have have a a presentiment presentiment that that it it must must be be a a girl,' girl,' returned returned miss miss betsey. betsey. 'don't 'don't contradict. contradict. from from the the moment moment of of this this girl's girl's birth, birth, child, child, i i intend intend to to be be her her friend. friend. i i intend intend to to be be her her godmother, godmother, and and i i beg beg you'll you'll call call her her betsey betsey trotwood trotwood copperfield. copperfield. there there must must be be no no mistakes mistakes in in life life with with this this betsey betsey trotwood. trotwood. there there must must be be no no trifling trifling with with her her affections, affections, poor poor dear. dear. she she must must be be well well brought brought up, up, and and well well guarded guarded from from reposing reposing any any foolish foolish confidences confidences where where they they are are not not deserved. deserved. i i must must make make that that my my care.' care.' there there was was a a twitch twitch of of miss miss betsey's betsey's head, head, after after each each of of these these sentences, sentences, as as if if her her own own old old wrongs wrongs were were working working within within her, her, and and she she repressed repressed any any plainer plainer reference reference to to them them by by strong strong constraint. constraint. so so my my mother mother suspected, suspected, at at least, least, as as she she observed observed her her by by the the low low glimmer glimmer of of the the fire: fire: too too much much scared scared by by miss miss betsey, betsey, too too uneasy uneasy in in herself, herself, and and too too subdued subdued and and bewildered bewildered altogether, altogether, to to observe observe anything anything very very clearly, clearly, or or to to know know what what to to say. say. 'and 'and was was david david good good to to you, child?' child?' asked asked miss miss betsey, betsey, when when she she had had been been silent silent for for a a little little while, while, and and these these motions motions of of her her head head had had gradually gradually ceased. ceased. 'were 'were you comfortable comfortable together?' together?' 'we 'we were were very very happy,' happy,' said said my my mother. mother. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield copperfield was was only only too too good good to to me.' me.' 'what, 'what, he he spoilt spoilt you, i i suppose?' suppose?' returned returned miss miss betsey. betsey. 'for 'for being being quite quite alone alone and and dependent dependent on on myself myself in in this this rough rough world world again, again, yes, yes, i i fear fear he he did did indeed,' indeed,' sobbed sobbed my my mother. mother. 'well! 'well! don't don't cry!' cry!' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'you were were not not equally equally matched, matched, child child -- -- if if any any two two people people can can be be equally equally matched matched -- -- and and so so i i asked asked the the question. question. you were were an an orphan, orphan, weren't weren't you?' 'yes.' 'yes.' 'and 'and a a governess?' governess?' 'i 'i was was nursery-governess nursery-governess in in a a family family where where mr. mr. copperfield copperfield came came to to visit. visit. mr. mr. copperfield copperfield was was very very kind kind to to me, me, and and took took a a great great deal deal of of notice notice of of me, me, and and paid paid me me a a good good deal deal of of attention, attention, and and at at last last proposed proposed to to me. me. and and i i accepted accepted him. him. and and so so we we were were married,' married,' said said my my mother mother simply. simply. 'ha! 'ha! poor poor baby!' baby!' mused mused miss miss betsey, betsey, with with her her frown frown still still bent bent upon upon the the fire. fire. 'do 'do you know know anything?' anything?' 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, ma'am,' ma'am,' faltered faltered my my mother. mother. 'about 'about keeping keeping house, house, for for instance,' instance,' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'not 'not much, much, i i fear,' fear,' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'not 'not so so much much as as i i could could wish. wish. but but mr. mr. copperfield copperfield was was teaching teaching me me -- -- ' ' ('much ('much he he knew knew about about it it himself!') himself!') said said miss miss betsey betsey in in a a parenthesis. parenthesis. -- -- 'and 'and i i hope hope i i should should have have improved, improved, being being very very anxious anxious to to learn, learn, and and he he very very patient patient to to teach teach me, me, if if the the great great misfortune misfortune of of his his death' death' -- -- my my mother mother broke broke down down again again here, here, and and could could get get no no farther. farther. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. -- -- 'i 'i kept kept my my housekeeping-book housekeeping-book regularly, regularly, and and balanced balanced it it with with mr. mr. copperfield copperfield every every night,' night,' cried cried my my mother mother in in another another burst burst of of distress, distress, and and breaking breaking down down again. again. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' said said miss miss betsey. betsey. 'don't 'don't cry cry any any more.' more.' -- -- 'and 'and i i am am sure sure we we never never had had a a word word of of difference difference respecting respecting it, it, except except when when mr. mr. copperfield copperfield objected objected to to my my threes threes and and fives fives being being too too much much like like each each other, other, or or to to my my putting putting curly curly tails tails to to my my sevens sevens and and nines,' nines,' resumed resumed my my mother mother in in another another burst, burst, and and breaking breaking down down again. again. 'you'll 'you'll make make yourself yourself ill,' ill,' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, 'and 'and you know know that that will will not not be be good good either either for for you or or for for my my god-daughter. god-daughter. come! come! you mustn't mustn't do do it!' it!' this this argument argument had had some some share share in in quieting quieting my my mother, mother, though though her her increasing increasing indisposition indisposition had had a a larger larger one. one. there there was was an an interval interval of of silence, silence, only only broken broken by by miss miss betsey's betsey's occasionally occasionally ejaculating ejaculating 'ha!' 'ha!' as as she she sat sat with with her her feet feet upon upon the the fender. fender. 'david 'david had had bought bought an an annuity annuity for for himself himself with with his his money, money, i i know,' know,' said said she, she, by by and and by. by. 'what 'what did did he he do do for for you?' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said my my mother, mother, answering answering with with some some difficulty, difficulty, 'was 'was so so considerate considerate and and good good as as to to secure secure the the reversion reversion of of a a part part of of it it to to me.' me.' 'how 'how much?' much?' asked asked miss miss betsey. betsey. 'a 'a hundred hundred and and five five pounds pounds a a year,' year,' said said my my mother. mother. 'he 'he might might have have done done worse,' worse,' said said my my aunt. aunt. the the word word was was appropriate appropriate to to the the moment. moment. my my mother mother was was so so much much worse worse that that peggotty, peggotty, coming coming in in with with the the teaboard teaboard and and candles, candles, and and seeing seeing at at a a glance glance how how ill ill she she was, was, -- -- as as miss miss betsey betsey might might have have done done sooner sooner if if there there had had been been light light enough, enough, -- -- conveyed conveyed her her upstairs upstairs to to her her own own room room with with all all speed; speed; and and immediately immediately dispatched dispatched ham ham peggotty, peggotty, her her nephew, nephew, who who had had been been for for some some days days past past secreted secreted in in the the house, house, unknown unknown to to my my mother, mother, as as a a special special messenger messenger in in case case of of emergency, emergency, to to fetch fetch the the nurse nurse and and doctor. doctor. those those allied allied powers powers were were considerably considerably astonished, astonished, when when they they arrived arrived within within a a few few minutes minutes of of each each other, other, to to find find an an unknown unknown lady lady of of portentous portentous appearance, appearance, sitting sitting before before the the fire, fire, with with her her bonnet bonnet tied tied over over her her left left arm, arm, stopping stopping her her ears ears with with jewellers' jewellers' cotton. cotton. peggotty peggotty knowing knowing nothing nothing about about her, her, and and my my mother mother saying saying nothing nothing about about her, her, she she was was quite quite a a mystery mystery in in the the parlour; parlour; and and the the fact fact of of her her having having a a magazine magazine of of jewellers' jewellers' cotton cotton in in her her pocket, pocket, and and sticking sticking the the article article in in her her ears ears in in that that way, way, did did not not detract detract from from the the solemnity solemnity of of her her presence. presence. the the doctor doctor having having been been upstairs upstairs and and come come down down again, again, and and having having satisfied satisfied himself, himself, i i suppose, suppose, that that there there was was a a probability probability of of this this unknown unknown lady lady and and himself himself having having to to sit sit there, there, face face to to face, face, for for some some hours, hours, laid laid himself himself out out to to be be polite polite and and social. social. he he was was the the meekest meekest of of his his sex, sex, the the mildest mildest of of little little men. men. he he sidled sidled in in and and out out of of a a room, room, to to take take up up the the less less space. space. he he walked walked as as softly softly as as the the ghost ghost in in hamlet, hamlet, and and more more slowly. slowly. he he carried carried his his head head on on one one side, side, partly partly in in modest modest depreciation depreciation of of himself, himself, partly partly in in modest modest propitiation propitiation of of everybody everybody else. else. it it is is nothing nothing to to say say that that he he hadn't hadn't a a word word to to throw throw at at a a dog. dog. he he couldn't couldn't have have thrown thrown a a word word at at a a mad mad dog. dog. he he might might have have offered offered him him one one gently, gently, or or half half a a one, one, or or a a fragment fragment of of one; one; for for he he spoke spoke as as slowly slowly as as he he walked; walked; but but he he wouldn't wouldn't have have been been rude rude to to him, him, and and he he couldn't couldn't have have been been quick quick with with him, him, for for any any earthly earthly consideration. consideration. mr. mr. chillip, chillip, looking looking mildly mildly at at my my aunt aunt with with his his head head on on one one side, side, and and making making her her a a little little bow, bow, said, said, in in allusion allusion to to the the jewellers' jewellers' cotton, cotton, as as he he softly softly touched touched his his left left ear: ear: 'some 'some local local irritation, irritation, ma'am?' ma'am?' 'what!' 'what!' replied replied my my aunt, aunt, pulling pulling the the cotton cotton out out of of one one ear ear like like a a cork. cork. mr. mr. chillip chillip was was so so alarmed alarmed by by her her abruptness abruptness -- -- as as he he told told my my mother mother afterwards afterwards -- -- that that it it was was a a mercy mercy he he didn't didn't lose lose his his presence presence of of mind. mind. but but he he repeated repeated sweetly: sweetly: 'some 'some local local irritation, irritation, ma'am?' ma'am?' 'nonsense!' 'nonsense!' replied replied my my aunt, aunt, and and corked corked herself herself again, again, at at one one blow. blow. mr. mr. chillip chillip could could do do nothing nothing after after this, this, but but sit sit and and look look at at her her feebly, feebly, as as she she sat sat and and looked looked at at the the fire, fire, until until he he was was called called upstairs upstairs again. again. after after some some quarter quarter of of an an hour's hour's absence, absence, he he returned. returned. 'well?' 'well?' said said my my aunt, aunt, taking taking the the cotton cotton out out of of the the ear ear nearest nearest to to him. him. 'well, 'well, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'we 'we are are -- -- we we are are progressing progressing slowly, slowly, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'ba 'ba -- -- a a -- -- ah!' ah!' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a perfect perfect shake shake on on the the contemptuous contemptuous interjection. interjection. and and corked corked herself herself as as before. before. really really -- -- really really -- -- as as mr. mr. chillip chillip told told my my mother, mother, he he was was almost almost shocked; shocked; speaking speaking in in a a professional professional point point of of view view alone, alone, he he was was almost almost shocked. shocked. but but he he sat sat and and looked looked at at her, her, notwithstanding, notwithstanding, for for nearly nearly two two hours, hours, as as she she sat sat looking looking at at the the fire, fire, until until he he was was again again called called out. out. after after another another absence, absence, he he again again returned. returned. 'well?' 'well?' said said my my aunt, aunt, taking taking out out the the cotton cotton on on that that side side again. again. 'well, 'well, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'we 'we are are -- -- we we are are progressing progressing slowly, slowly, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'ya 'ya -- -- a a -- -- ah!' ah!' said said my my aunt. aunt. with with such such a a snarl snarl at at him, him, that that mr. mr. chillip chillip absolutely absolutely could could not not bear bear it. it. it it was was really really calculated calculated to to break break his his spirit, spirit, he he said said afterwards. afterwards. he he preferred preferred to to go go and and sit sit upon upon the the stairs, stairs, in in the the dark dark and and a a strong strong draught, draught, until until he he was was again again sent sent for. for. ham ham peggotty, peggotty, who who went went to to the the national national school, school, and and was was a a very very dragon dragon at at his his catechism, catechism, and and who who may may therefore therefore be be regarded regarded as as a a credible credible witness, witness, reported reported next next day, day, that that happening happening to to peep peep in in at at the the parlour-door parlour-door an an hour hour after after this, this, he he was was instantly instantly descried descried by by miss miss betsey, betsey, then then walking walking to to and and fro fro in in a a state state of of agitation, agitation, and and pounced pounced upon upon before before he he could could make make his his escape. escape. that that there there were were now now occasional occasional sounds sounds of of feet feet and and voices voices overhead overhead which which he he inferred inferred the the cotton cotton did did not not exclude, exclude, from from the the circumstance circumstance of of his his evidently evidently being being clutched clutched by by the the lady lady as as a a victim victim on on whom whom to to expend expend her her superabundant superabundant agitation agitation when when the the sounds sounds were were loudest. loudest. that, that, marching marching him him constantly constantly up up and and down down by by the the collar collar (as (as if if he he had had been been taking taking too too much much laudanum), laudanum), she, she, at at those those times, times, shook shook him, him, rumpled rumpled his his hair, hair, made made light light of of his his linen, linen, stopped stopped his his ears ears as as if if she she confounded confounded them them with with her her own, own, and and otherwise otherwise tousled tousled and and maltreated maltreated him. him. this this was was in in part part confirmed confirmed by by his his aunt, aunt, who who saw saw him him at at half half past past twelve twelve o'clock, o'clock, soon soon after after his his release, release, and and affirmed affirmed that that he he was was then then as as red red as as i i was. was. the the mild mild mr. mr. chillip chillip could could not not possibly possibly bear bear malice malice at at such such a a time, time, if if at at any any time. time. he he sidled sidled into into the the parlour parlour as as soon soon as as he he was was at at liberty, liberty, and and said said to to my my aunt aunt in in his his meekest meekest manner: manner: 'well, 'well, ma'am, ma'am, i i am am happy happy to to congratulate congratulate you.' 'what 'what upon?' upon?' said said my my aunt, aunt, sharply. sharply. mr. mr. chillip chillip was was fluttered fluttered again, again, by by the the extreme extreme severity severity of of my my aunt's aunt's manner; manner; so so he he made made her her a a little little bow bow and and gave gave her her a a little little smile, smile, to to mollify mollify her. her. 'mercy 'mercy on on the the man, man, what's what's he he doing!' doing!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, impatiently. impatiently. 'can't 'can't he he speak?' speak?' 'be 'be calm, calm, my my dear dear ma'am,' ma'am,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, in in his his softest softest accents. accents. 'there 'there is is no no longer longer any any occasion occasion for for uneasiness, uneasiness, ma'am. ma'am. be be calm.' calm.' it it has has since since been been considered considered almost almost a a miracle miracle that that my my aunt aunt didn't didn't shake shake him, him, and and shake shake what what he he had had to to say, say, out out of of him. him. she she only only shook shook her her own own head head at at him, him, but but in in a a way way that that made made him him quail. quail. 'well, 'well, ma'am,' ma'am,' resumed resumed mr. mr. chillip, chillip, as as soon soon as as he he had had courage, courage, 'i 'i am am happy happy to to congratulate congratulate you. all all is is now now over, over, ma'am, ma'am, and and well well over.' over.' during during the the five five minutes minutes or or so so that that mr. mr. chillip chillip devoted devoted to to the the delivery delivery of of this this oration, oration, my my aunt aunt eyed eyed him him narrowly. narrowly. 'how 'how is is she?' she?' said said my my aunt, aunt, folding folding her her arms arms with with her her bonnet bonnet still still tied tied on on one one of of them. them. 'well, 'well, ma'am, ma'am, she she will will soon soon be be quite quite comfortable, comfortable, i i hope,' hope,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'quite 'quite as as comfortable comfortable as as we we can can expect expect a a young young mother mother to to be, be, under under these these melancholy melancholy domestic domestic circumstances. circumstances. there there cannot cannot be be any any objection objection to to your your seeing seeing her her presently, presently, ma'am. ma'am. it it may may do do her her good.' good.' 'and 'and she. she. how how is is she?' she?' said said my my aunt, aunt, sharply. sharply. mr. mr. chillip chillip laid laid his his head head a a little little more more on on one one side, side, and and looked looked at at my my aunt aunt like like an an amiable amiable bird. bird. 'the 'the baby,' baby,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'how 'how is is she?' she?' 'ma'am,' 'ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'i 'i apprehended apprehended you had had known. known. it's it's a a boy.' boy.' my my aunt aunt said said never never a a word, word, but but took took her her bonnet bonnet by by the the strings, strings, in in the the manner manner of of a a sling, sling, aimed aimed a a blow blow at at mr. mr. chillip's chillip's head head with with it, it, put put it it on on bent, bent, walked walked out, out, and and never never came came back. back. she she vanished vanished like like a a discontented discontented fairy; fairy; or or like like one one of of those those supernatural supernatural beings, beings, whom whom it it was was popularly popularly supposed supposed i i was was entitled entitled to to see; see; and and never never came came back back any any more. more. no. no. i i lay lay in in my my basket, basket, and and my my mother mother lay lay in in her her bed; bed; but but betsey betsey trotwood trotwood copperfield copperfield was was for for ever ever in in the the land land of of dreams dreams and and shadows, shadows, the the tremendous tremendous region region whence whence i i had had so so lately lately travelled; travelled; and and the the light light upon upon the the window window of of our our room room shone shone out out upon upon the the earthly earthly bourne bourne of of all all such such travellers, travellers, and and the the mound mound above above the the ashes ashes and and the the dust dust that that once once was was he, he, without without whom whom i i had had never never been. been. chapter chapter 2. 2. i i observe observe the the first first objects objects that that assume assume a a distinct distinct presence presence before before me, me, as as i i look look far far back, back, into into the the blank blank of of my my infancy, infancy, are are my my mother mother with with her her pretty pretty hair hair and and youthful youthful shape, shape, and and peggotty peggotty with with no no shape shape at at all, all, and and eyes eyes so so dark dark that that they they seemed seemed to to darken darken their their whole whole neighbourhood neighbourhood in in her her face, face, and and cheeks cheeks and and arms arms so so hard hard and and red red that that i i wondered wondered the the birds birds didn't didn't peck peck her her in in preference preference to to apples. apples. i i believe believe i i can can remember remember these these two two at at a a little little distance distance apart, apart, dwarfed dwarfed to to my my sight sight by by stooping stooping down down or or kneeling kneeling on on the the floor, floor, and and i i going going unsteadily unsteadily from from the the one one to to the the other. other. i i have have an an impression impression on on my my mind mind which which i i cannot cannot distinguish distinguish from from actual actual remembrance, remembrance, of of the the touch touch of of peggotty's peggotty's forefinger forefinger as as she she used used to to hold hold it it out out to to me, me, and and of of its its being being roughened roughened by by needlework, needlework, like like a a pocket pocket nutmeg-grater. nutmeg-grater. this this may may be be fancy, fancy, though though i i think think the the memory memory of of most most of of us us can can go go farther farther back back into into such such times times than than many many of of us us suppose; suppose; just just as as i i believe believe the the power power of of observation observation in in numbers numbers of of very very young young children children to to be be quite quite wonderful wonderful for for its its closeness closeness and and accuracy. accuracy. indeed, indeed, i i think think that that most most grown grown men men who who are are remarkable remarkable in in this this respect, respect, may may with with greater greater propriety propriety be be said said not not to to have have lost lost the the faculty, faculty, than than to to have have acquired acquired it; it; the the rather, rather, as as i i generally generally observe observe such such men men to to retain retain a a certain certain freshness, freshness, and and gentleness, gentleness, and and capacity capacity of of being being pleased, pleased, which which are are also also an an inheritance inheritance they they have have preserved preserved from from their their childhood. childhood. i i might might have have a a misgiving misgiving that that i i am am 'meandering' 'meandering' in in stopping stopping to to say say this, this, but but that that it it brings brings me me to to remark remark that that i i build build these these conclusions, conclusions, in in part part upon upon my my own own experience experience of of myself; myself; and and if if it it should should appear appear from from anything anything i i may may set set down down in in this this narrative narrative that that i i was was a a child child of of close close observation, observation, or or that that as as a a man man i i have have a a strong strong memory memory of of my my childhood, childhood, i i undoubtedly undoubtedly lay lay claim claim to to both both of of these these characteristics. characteristics. looking looking back, back, as as i i was was saying, saying, into into the the blank blank of of my my infancy, infancy, the the first first objects objects i i can can remember remember as as standing standing out out by by themselves themselves from from a a confusion confusion of of things, things, are are my my mother mother and and peggotty. peggotty. what what else else do do i i remember? remember? let let me me see. see. there there comes comes out out of of the the cloud, cloud, our our house house -- -- not not new new to to me, me, but but quite quite familiar, familiar, in in its its earliest earliest remembrance. remembrance. on on the the ground-floor ground-floor is is peggotty's peggotty's kitchen, kitchen, opening opening into into a a back back yard; yard; with with a a pigeon-house pigeon-house on on a a pole, pole, in in the the centre, centre, without without any any pigeons pigeons in in it; it; a a great great dog-kennel dog-kennel in in a a corner, corner, without without any any dog; dog; and and a a quantity quantity of of fowls fowls that that look look terribly terribly tall tall to to me, me, walking walking about, about, in in a a menacing menacing and and ferocious ferocious manner. manner. there there is is one one cock cock who who gets gets upon upon a a post post to to crow, crow, and and seems seems to to take take particular particular notice notice of of me me as as i i look look at at him him through through the the kitchen kitchen window, window, who who makes makes me me shiver, shiver, he he is is so so fierce. fierce. of of the the geese geese outside outside the the side-gate side-gate who who come come waddling waddling after after me me with with their their long long necks necks stretched stretched out out when when i i go go that that way, way, i i dream dream at at night: night: as as a a man man environed environed by by wild wild beasts beasts might might dream dream of of lions. lions. here here is is a a long long passage passage -- -- what what an an enormous enormous perspective perspective i i make make of of it! it! -- -- leading leading from from peggotty's peggotty's kitchen kitchen to to the the front front door. door. a a dark dark store-room store-room opens opens out out of of it, it, and and that that is is a a place place to to be be run run past past at at night; night; for for i i don't don't know know what what may may be be among among those those tubs tubs and and jars jars and and old old tea-chests, tea-chests, when when there there is is nobody nobody in in there there with with a a dimly-burning dimly-burning light, light, letting letting a a mouldy mouldy air air come come out out of of the the door, door, in in which which there there is is the the smell smell of of soap, soap, pickles, pickles, pepper, pepper, candles, candles, and and coffee, coffee, all all at at one one whiff. whiff. then then there there are are the the two two parlours: parlours: the the parlour parlour in in which which we we sit sit of of an an evening, evening, my my mother mother and and i i and and peggotty peggotty -- -- for for peggotty peggotty is is quite quite our our companion, companion, when when her her work work is is done done and and we we are are alone alone -- -- and and the the best best parlour parlour where where we we sit sit on on a a sunday; sunday; grandly, grandly, but but not not so so comfortably. comfortably. there there is is something something of of a a doleful doleful air air about about that that room room to to me, me, for for peggotty peggotty has has told told me me -- -- i i don't don't know know when, when, but but apparently apparently ages ages ago ago -- -- about about my my father's father's funeral, funeral, and and the the company company having having their their black black cloaks cloaks put put on. on. one one sunday sunday night night my my mother mother reads reads to to peggotty peggotty and and me me in in there, there, how how lazarus lazarus was was raised raised up up from from the the dead. dead. and and i i am am so so frightened frightened that that they they are are afterwards afterwards obliged obliged to to take take me me out out of of bed, bed, and and show show me me the the quiet quiet churchyard churchyard out out of of the the bedroom bedroom window, window, with with the the dead dead all all lying lying in in their their graves graves at at rest, rest, below below the the solemn solemn moon. moon. there there is is nothing nothing half half so so green green that that i i know know anywhere, anywhere, as as the the grass grass of of that that churchyard; churchyard; nothing nothing half half so so shady shady as as its its trees; trees; nothing nothing half half so so quiet quiet as as its its tombstones. tombstones. the the sheep sheep are are feeding feeding there, there, when when i i kneel kneel up, up, early early in in the the morning, morning, in in my my little little bed bed in in a a closet closet within within my my mother's mother's room, room, to to look look out out at at it; it; and and i i see see the the red red light light shining shining on on the the sun-dial, sun-dial, and and think think within within myself, myself, 'is 'is the the sun-dial sun-dial glad, glad, i i wonder, wonder, that that it it can can tell tell the the time time again?' again?' here here is is our our pew pew in in the the church. church. what what a a high-backed high-backed pew! pew! with with a a window window near near it, it, out out of of which which our our house house can can be be seen, seen, and and is is seen seen many many times times during during the the morning's morning's service, service, by by peggotty, peggotty, who who likes likes to to make make herself herself as as sure sure as as she she can can that that it's it's not not being being robbed, robbed, or or is is not not in in flames. flames. but but though though peggotty's peggotty's eye eye wanders, wanders, she she is is much much offended offended if if mine mine does, does, and and frowns frowns to to me, me, as as i i stand stand upon upon the the seat, seat, that that i i am am to to look look at at the the clergyman. clergyman. but but i i can't can't always always look look at at him him -- -- i i know know him him without without that that white white thing thing on, on, and and i i am am afraid afraid of of his his wondering wondering why why i i stare stare so, so, and and perhaps perhaps stopping stopping the the service service to to inquire inquire -- -- and and what what am am i i to to do? do? it's it's a a dreadful dreadful thing thing to to gape, gape, but but i i must must do do something. something. i i look look at at my my mother, mother, but but she she pretends pretends not not to to see see me. me. i i look look at at a a boy boy in in the the aisle, aisle, and and he he makes makes faces faces at at me. me. i i look look at at the the sunlight sunlight coming coming in in at at the the open open door door through through the the porch, porch, and and there there i i see see a a stray stray sheep sheep -- -- i i don't don't mean mean a a sinner, sinner, but but mutton mutton -- -- half half making making up up his his mind mind to to come come into into the the church. church. i i feel feel that that if if i i looked looked at at him him any any longer, longer, i i might might be be tempted tempted to to say say something something out out loud; loud; and and what what would would become become of of me me then! then! i i look look up up at at the the monumental monumental tablets tablets on on the the wall, wall, and and try try to to think think of of mr. mr. bodgers bodgers late late of of this this parish, parish, and and what what the the feelings feelings of of mrs. mrs. bodgers bodgers must must have have been, been, when when affliction affliction sore, sore, long long time time mr. mr. bodgers bodgers bore, bore, and and physicians physicians were were in in vain. vain. i i wonder wonder whether whether they they called called in in mr. mr. chillip, chillip, and and he he was was in in vain; vain; and and if if so, so, how how he he likes likes to to be be reminded reminded of of it it once once a a week. week. i i look look from from mr. mr. chillip, chillip, in in his his sunday sunday neckcloth, neckcloth, to to the the pulpit; pulpit; and and think think what what a a good good place place it it would would be be to to play play in, in, and and what what a a castle castle it it would would make, make, with with another another boy boy coming coming up up the the stairs stairs to to attack attack it, it, and and having having the the velvet velvet cushion cushion with with the the tassels tassels thrown thrown down down on on his his head. head. in in time time my my eyes eyes gradually gradually shut shut up; up; and, and, from from seeming seeming to to hear hear the the clergyman clergyman singing singing a a drowsy drowsy song song in in the the heat, heat, i i hear hear nothing, nothing, until until i i fall fall off off the the seat seat with with a a crash, crash, and and am am taken taken out, out, more more dead dead than than alive, alive, by by peggotty. peggotty. and and now now i i see see the the outside outside of of our our house, house, with with the the latticed latticed bedroom-windows bedroom-windows standing standing open open to to let let in in the the sweet-smelling sweet-smelling air, air, and and the the ragged ragged old old rooks'-nests rooks'-nests still still dangling dangling in in the the elm-trees elm-trees at at the the bottom bottom of of the the front front garden. garden. now now i i am am in in the the garden garden at at the the back, back, beyond beyond the the yard yard where where the the empty empty pigeon-house pigeon-house and and dog-kennel dog-kennel are are -- -- a a very very preserve preserve of of butterflies, butterflies, as as i i remember remember it, it, with with a a high high fence, fence, and and a a gate gate and and padlock; padlock; where where the the fruit fruit clusters clusters on on the the trees, trees, riper riper and and richer richer than than fruit fruit has has ever ever been been since, since, in in any any other other garden, garden, and and where where my my mother mother gathers gathers some some in in a a basket, basket, while while i i stand stand by, by, bolting bolting furtive furtive gooseberries, gooseberries, and and trying trying to to look look unmoved. unmoved. a a great great wind wind rises, rises, and and the the summer summer is is gone gone in in a a moment. moment. we we are are playing playing in in the the winter winter twilight, twilight, dancing dancing about about the the parlour. parlour. when when my my mother mother is is out out of of breath breath and and rests rests herself herself in in an an elbow-chair, elbow-chair, i i watch watch her her winding winding her her bright bright curls curls round round her her fingers, fingers, and and straitening straitening her her waist, waist, and and nobody nobody knows knows better better than than i i do do that that she she likes likes to to look look so so well, well, and and is is proud proud of of being being so so pretty. pretty. that that is is among among my my very very earliest earliest impressions. impressions. that, that, and and a a sense sense that that we we were were both both a a little little afraid afraid of of peggotty, peggotty, and and submitted submitted ourselves ourselves in in most most things things to to her her direction, direction, were were among among the the first first opinions opinions -- -- if if they they may may be be so so called called -- -- that that i i ever ever derived derived from from what what i i saw. saw. peggotty peggotty and and i i were were sitting sitting one one night night by by the the parlour parlour fire, fire, alone. alone. i i had had been been reading reading to to peggotty peggotty about about crocodiles. crocodiles. i i must must have have read read very very perspicuously, perspicuously, or or the the poor poor soul soul must must have have been been deeply deeply interested, interested, for for i i remember remember she she had had a a cloudy cloudy impression, impression, after after i i had had done, done, that that they they were were a a sort sort of of vegetable. vegetable. i i was was tired tired of of reading, reading, and and dead dead sleepy; sleepy; but but having having leave, leave, as as a a high high treat, treat, to to sit sit up up until until my my mother mother came came home home from from spending spending the the evening evening at at a a neighbour's, neighbour's, i i would would rather rather have have died died upon upon my my post post (of (of course) course) than than have have gone gone to to bed. bed. i i had had reached reached that that stage stage of of sleepiness sleepiness when when peggotty peggotty seemed seemed to to swell swell and and grow grow immensely immensely large. large. i i propped propped my my eyelids eyelids open open with with my my two two forefingers, forefingers, and and looked looked perseveringly perseveringly at at her her as as she she sat sat at at work; work; at at the the little little bit bit of of wax-candle wax-candle she she kept kept for for her her thread thread -- -- how how old old it it looked, looked, being being so so wrinkled wrinkled in in all all directions! directions! -- -- at at the the little little house house with with a a thatched thatched roof, roof, where where the the yard-measure yard-measure lived; lived; at at her her work-box work-box with with a a sliding sliding lid, lid, with with a a view view of of st. st. paul's paul's cathedral cathedral (with (with a a pink pink dome) dome) painted painted on on the the top; top; at at the the brass brass thimble thimble on on her her finger; finger; at at herself, herself, whom whom i i thought thought lovely. lovely. i i felt felt so so sleepy, sleepy, that that i i knew knew if if i i lost lost sight sight of of anything anything for for a a moment, moment, i i was was gone. gone. 'peggotty,' 'peggotty,' says says i, i, suddenly, suddenly, 'were 'were you ever ever married?' married?' 'lord, 'lord, master master davy,' davy,' replied replied peggotty. peggotty. 'what's 'what's put put marriage marriage in in your your head?' head?' she she answered answered with with such such a a start, start, that that it it quite quite awoke awoke me. me. and and then then she she stopped stopped in in her her work, work, and and looked looked at at me, me, with with her her needle needle drawn drawn out out to to its its thread's thread's length. length. 'but 'but were were you ever ever married, married, peggotty?' peggotty?' says says i. i. 'you are are a a very very handsome handsome woman, woman, an't an't you?' i i thought thought her her in in a a different different style style from from my my mother, mother, certainly; certainly; but but of of another another school school of of beauty, beauty, i i considered considered her her a a perfect perfect example. example. there there was was a a red red velvet velvet footstool footstool in in the the best best parlour, parlour, on on which which my my mother mother had had painted painted a a nosegay. nosegay. the the ground-work ground-work of of that that stool, stool, and and peggotty's peggotty's complexion complexion appeared appeared to to me me to to be be one one and and the the same same thing. thing. the the stool stool was was smooth, smooth, and and peggotty peggotty was was rough, rough, but but that that made made no no difference. difference. 'me 'me handsome, handsome, davy!' davy!' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'lawk, 'lawk, no, no, my my dear! dear! but but what what put put marriage marriage in in your your head?' head?' 'i 'i don't don't know! know! -- -- you mustn't mustn't marry marry more more than than one one person person at at a a time, time, may may you, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'certainly 'certainly not,' not,' says says peggotty, peggotty, with with the the promptest promptest decision. decision. 'but 'but if if you marry marry a a person, person, and and the the person person dies, dies, why why then then you may may marry marry another another person, person, mayn't mayn't you, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'you may,' may,' says says peggotty, peggotty, 'if 'if you choose, choose, my my dear. dear. that's that's a a matter matter of of opinion.' opinion.' 'but 'but what what is is your your opinion, opinion, peggotty?' peggotty?' said said i. i. i i asked asked her, her, and and looked looked curiously curiously at at her, her, because because she she looked looked so so curiously curiously at at me. me. 'my 'my opinion opinion is,' is,' said said peggotty, peggotty, taking taking her her eyes eyes from from me, me, after after a a little little indecision indecision and and going going on on with with her her work, work, 'that 'that i i never never was was married married myself, myself, master master davy, davy, and and that that i i don't don't expect expect to to be. be. that's that's all all i i know know about about the the subject.' subject.' 'you an't an't cross, cross, i i suppose, suppose, peggotty, peggotty, are are you?' said said i, i, after after sitting sitting quiet quiet for for a a minute. minute. i i really really thought thought she she was, was, she she had had been been so so short short with with me; me; but but i i was was quite quite mistaken: mistaken: for for she she laid laid aside aside her her work work (which (which was was a a stocking stocking of of her her own), own), and and opening opening her her arms arms wide, wide, took took my my curly curly head head within within them, them, and and gave gave it it a a good good squeeze. squeeze. i i know know it it was was a a good good squeeze, squeeze, because, because, being being very very plump, plump, whenever whenever she she made made any any little little exertion exertion after after she she was was dressed, dressed, some some of of the the buttons buttons on on the the back back of of her her gown gown flew flew off. off. and and i i recollect recollect two two bursting bursting to to the the opposite opposite side side of of the the parlour, parlour, while while she she was was hugging hugging me. me. 'now 'now let let me me hear hear some some more more about about the the crorkindills,' crorkindills,' said said peggotty, peggotty, who who was was not not quite quite right right in in the the name name yet, yet, 'for 'for i i an't an't heard heard half half enough.' enough.' i i couldn't couldn't quite quite understand understand why why peggotty peggotty looked looked so so queer, queer, or or why why she she was was so so ready ready to to go go back back to to the the crocodiles. crocodiles. however, however, we we returned returned to to those those monsters, monsters, with with fresh fresh wakefulness wakefulness on on my my part, part, and and we we left left their their eggs eggs in in the the sand sand for for the the sun sun to to hatch; hatch; and and we we ran ran away away from from them, them, and and baffled baffled them them by by constantly constantly turning, turning, which which they they were were unable unable to to do do quickly, quickly, on on account account of of their their unwieldy unwieldy make; make; and and we we went went into into the the water water after after them, them, as as natives, natives, and and put put sharp sharp pieces pieces of of timber timber down down their their throats; throats; and and in in short short we we ran ran the the whole whole crocodile crocodile gauntlet. gauntlet. i i did, did, at at least; least; but but i i had had my my doubts doubts of of peggotty, peggotty, who who was was thoughtfully thoughtfully sticking sticking her her needle needle into into various various parts parts of of her her face face and and arms, arms, all all the the time. time. we we had had exhausted exhausted the the crocodiles, crocodiles, and and begun begun with with the the alligators, alligators, when when the the garden-bell garden-bell rang. rang. we we went went out out to to the the door; door; and and there there was was my my mother, mother, looking looking unusually unusually pretty, pretty, i i thought, thought, and and with with her her a a gentleman gentleman with with beautiful beautiful black black hair hair and and whiskers, whiskers, who who had had walked walked home home with with us us from from church church last last sunday. sunday. as as my my mother mother stooped stooped down down on on the the threshold threshold to to take take me me in in her her arms arms and and kiss kiss me, me, the the gentleman gentleman said said i i was was a a more more highly highly privileged privileged little little fellow fellow than than a a monarch monarch -- -- or or something something like like that; that; for for my my later later understanding understanding comes, comes, i i am am sensible, sensible, to to my my aid aid here. here. 'what 'what does does that that mean?' mean?' i i asked asked him, him, over over her her shoulder. shoulder. he he patted patted me me on on the the head; head; but but somehow, somehow, i i didn't didn't like like him him or or his his deep deep voice, voice, and and i i was was jealous jealous that that his his hand hand should should touch touch my my mother's mother's in in touching touching me me -- -- which which it it did. did. i i put put it it away, away, as as well well as as i i could. could. 'oh, 'oh, davy!' davy!' remonstrated remonstrated my my mother. mother. 'dear 'dear boy!' boy!' said said the the gentleman. gentleman. 'i 'i cannot cannot wonder wonder at at his his devotion!' devotion!' i i never never saw saw such such a a beautiful beautiful colour colour on on my my mother's mother's face face before. before. she she gently gently chid chid me me for for being being rude; rude; and, and, keeping keeping me me close close to to her her shawl, shawl, turned turned to to thank thank the the gentleman gentleman for for taking taking so so much much trouble trouble as as to to bring bring her her home. home. she she put put out out her her hand hand to to him him as as she she spoke, spoke, and, and, as as he he met met it it with with his his own, own, she she glanced, glanced, i i thought, thought, at at me. me. 'let 'let us us say say "good "good night", night", my my fine fine boy,' boy,' said said the the gentleman, gentleman, when when he he had had bent bent his his head head -- -- i i saw saw him! him! -- -- over over my my mother's mother's little little glove. glove. 'good 'good night!' night!' said said i. i. 'come! 'come! let let us us be be the the best best friends friends in in the the world!' world!' said said the the gentleman, gentleman, laughing. laughing. 'shake 'shake hands!' hands!' my my right right hand hand was was in in my my mother's mother's left, left, so so i i gave gave him him the the other. other. 'why, 'why, that's that's the the wrong wrong hand, hand, davy!' davy!' laughed laughed the the gentleman. gentleman. my my mother mother drew drew my my right right hand hand forward, forward, but but i i was was resolved, resolved, for for my my former former reason, reason, not not to to give give it it him, him, and and i i did did not. not. i i gave gave him him the the other, other, and and he he shook shook it it heartily, heartily, and and said said i i was was a a brave brave fellow, fellow, and and went went away. away. at at this this minute minute i i see see him him turn turn round round in in the the garden, garden, and and give give us us a a last last look look with with his his ill-omened ill-omened black black eyes, eyes, before before the the door door was was shut. shut. peggotty, peggotty, who who had had not not said said a a word word or or moved moved a a finger, finger, secured secured the the fastenings fastenings instantly, instantly, and and we we all all went went into into the the parlour. parlour. my my mother, mother, contrary contrary to to her her usual usual habit, habit, instead instead of of coming coming to to the the elbow-chair elbow-chair by by the the fire, fire, remained remained at at the the other other end end of of the the room, room, and and sat sat singing singing to to herself. herself. -- -- 'hope 'hope you have have had had a a pleasant pleasant evening, evening, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said peggotty, peggotty, standing standing as as stiff stiff as as a a barrel barrel in in the the centre centre of of the the room, room, with with a a candlestick candlestick in in her her hand. hand. 'much 'much obliged obliged to to you, peggotty,' peggotty,' returned returned my my mother, mother, in in a a cheerful cheerful voice, voice, 'i 'i have have had had a a very very pleasant pleasant evening.' evening.' 'a 'a stranger stranger or or so so makes makes an an agreeable agreeable change,' change,' suggested suggested peggotty. peggotty. 'a 'a very very agreeable agreeable change, change, indeed,' indeed,' returned returned my my mother. mother. peggotty peggotty continuing continuing to to stand stand motionless motionless in in the the middle middle of of the the room, room, and and my my mother mother resuming resuming her her singing, singing, i i fell fell asleep, asleep, though though i i was was not not so so sound sound asleep asleep but but that that i i could could hear hear voices, voices, without without hearing hearing what what they they said. said. when when i i half half awoke awoke from from this this uncomfortable uncomfortable doze, doze, i i found found peggotty peggotty and and my my mother mother both both in in tears, tears, and and both both talking. talking. 'not 'not such such a a one one as as this, this, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield wouldn't wouldn't have have liked,' liked,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'that 'that i i say, say, and and that that i i swear!' swear!' 'good 'good heavens!' heavens!' cried cried my my mother, mother, 'you'll 'you'll drive drive me me mad! mad! was was ever ever any any poor poor girl girl so so ill-used ill-used by by her her servants servants as as i i am! am! why why do do i i do do myself myself the the injustice injustice of of calling calling myself myself a a girl? girl? have have i i never never been been married, married, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'god 'god knows knows you have, have, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned peggotty. peggotty. 'then, 'then, how how can can you dare,' dare,' said said my my mother mother -- -- 'you know know i i don't don't mean mean how how can can you dare, dare, peggotty, peggotty, but but how how can can you have have the the heart heart -- -- to to make make me me so so uncomfortable uncomfortable and and say say such such bitter bitter things things to to me, me, when when you are are well well aware aware that that i i haven't, haven't, out out of of this this place, place, a a single single friend friend to to turn turn to?' to?' 'the 'the more's more's the the reason,' reason,' returned returned peggotty, peggotty, 'for 'for saying saying that that it it won't won't do. do. no! no! that that it it won't won't do. do. no! no! no no price price could could make make it it do. do. no!' no!' -- -- i i thought thought peggotty peggotty would would have have thrown thrown the the candlestick candlestick away, away, she she was was so so emphatic emphatic with with it. it. 'how 'how can can you be be so so aggravating,' aggravating,' said said my my mother, mother, shedding shedding more more tears tears than than before, before, 'as 'as to to talk talk in in such such an an unjust unjust manner! manner! how how can can you go go on on as as if if it it was was all all settled settled and and arranged, arranged, peggotty, peggotty, when when i i tell tell you over over and and over over again, again, you cruel cruel thing, thing, that that beyond beyond the the commonest commonest civilities civilities nothing nothing has has passed! passed! you talk talk of of admiration. admiration. what what am am i i to to do? do? if if people people are are so so silly silly as as to to indulge indulge the the sentiment, sentiment, is is it it my my fault? fault? what what am am i i to to do, do, i i ask ask you? would would you wish wish me me to to shave shave my my head head and and black black my my face, face, or or disfigure disfigure myself myself with with a a burn, burn, or or a a scald, scald, or or something something of of that that sort? sort? i i dare dare say say you would, would, peggotty. peggotty. i i dare dare say say you'd you'd quite quite enjoy enjoy it.' it.' peggotty peggotty seemed seemed to to take take this this aspersion aspersion very very much much to to heart, heart, i i thought. thought. 'and 'and my my dear dear boy,' boy,' cried cried my my mother, mother, coming coming to to the the elbow-chair elbow-chair in in which which i i was, was, and and caressing caressing me, me, 'my 'my own own little little davy! davy! is is it it to to be be hinted hinted to to me me that that i i am am wanting wanting in in affection affection for for my my precious precious treasure, treasure, the the dearest dearest little little fellow fellow that that ever ever was!' was!' 'nobody 'nobody never never went went and and hinted hinted no no such such a a thing,' thing,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'you did, did, peggotty!' peggotty!' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'you know know you did. did. what what else else was was it it possible possible to to infer infer from from what what you said, said, you unkind unkind creature, creature, when when you know know as as well well as as i i do, do, that that on on his his account account only only last last quarter quarter i i wouldn't wouldn't buy buy myself myself a a new new parasol, parasol, though though that that old old green green one one is is frayed frayed the the whole whole way way up, up, and and the the fringe fringe is is perfectly perfectly mangy? mangy? you know know it it is, is, peggotty. peggotty. you can't can't deny deny it.' it.' then, then, turning turning affectionately affectionately to to me, me, with with her her cheek cheek against against mine, mine, 'am 'am i i a a naughty naughty mama mama to to you, davy? davy? am am i i a a nasty, nasty, cruel, cruel, selfish, selfish, bad bad mama? mama? say say i i am, am, my my child; child; say say "yes", "yes", dear dear boy, boy, and and peggotty peggotty will will love love you; and and peggotty's peggotty's love love is is a a great great deal deal better better than than mine, mine, davy. davy. i i don't don't love love you at at all, all, do do i?' i?' at at this, this, we we all all fell fell a-crying a-crying together. together. i i think think i i was was the the loudest loudest of of the the party, party, but but i i am am sure sure we we were were all all sincere sincere about about it. it. i i was was quite quite heart-broken heart-broken myself, myself, and and am am afraid afraid that that in in the the first first transports transports of of wounded wounded tenderness tenderness i i called called peggotty peggotty a a 'beast'. 'beast'. that that honest honest creature creature was was in in deep deep affliction, affliction, i i remember, remember, and and must must have have become become quite quite buttonless buttonless on on the the occasion; occasion; for for a a little little volley volley of of those those explosives explosives went went off, off, when, when, after after having having made made it it up up with with my my mother, mother, she she kneeled kneeled down down by by the the elbow-chair, elbow-chair, and and made made it it up up with with me. me. we we went went to to bed bed greatly greatly dejected. dejected. my my sobs sobs kept kept waking waking me, me, for for a a long long time; time; and and when when one one very very strong strong sob sob quite quite hoisted hoisted me me up up in in bed, bed, i i found found my my mother mother sitting sitting on on the the coverlet, coverlet, and and leaning leaning over over me. me. i i fell fell asleep asleep in in her her arms, arms, after after that, that, and and slept slept soundly. soundly. whether whether it it was was the the following following sunday sunday when when i i saw saw the the gentleman gentleman again, again, or or whether whether there there was was any any greater greater lapse lapse of of time time before before he he reappeared, reappeared, i i cannot cannot recall. recall. i i don't don't profess profess to to be be clear clear about about dates. dates. but but there there he he was, was, in in church, church, and and he he walked walked home home with with us us afterwards. afterwards. he he came came in, in, too, too, to to look look at at a a famous famous geranium geranium we we had, had, in in the the parlour-window. parlour-window. it it did did not not appear appear to to me me that that he he took took much much notice notice of of it, it, but but before before he he went went he he asked asked my my mother mother to to give give him him a a bit bit of of the the blossom. blossom. she she begged begged him him to to choose choose it it for for himself, himself, but but he he refused refused to to do do that that -- -- i i could could not not understand understand why why -- -- so so she she plucked plucked it it for for him, him, and and gave gave it it into into his his hand. hand. he he said said he he would would never, never, never never part part with with it it any any more; more; and and i i thought thought he he must must be be quite quite a a fool fool not not to to know know that that it it would would fall fall to to pieces pieces in in a a day day or or two. two. peggotty peggotty began began to to be be less less with with us, us, of of an an evening, evening, than than she she had had always always been. been. my my mother mother deferred deferred to to her her very very much much -- -- more more than than usual, usual, it it occurred occurred to to me me -- -- and and we we were were all all three three excellent excellent friends; friends; still still we we were were different different from from what what we we used used to to be, be, and and were were not not so so comfortable comfortable among among ourselves. ourselves. sometimes sometimes i i fancied fancied that that peggotty peggotty perhaps perhaps objected objected to to my my mother's mother's wearing wearing all all the the pretty pretty dresses dresses she she had had in in her her drawers, drawers, or or to to her her going going so so often often to to visit visit at at that that neighbour's; neighbour's; but but i i couldn't, couldn't, to to my my satisfaction, satisfaction, make make out out how how it it was. was. gradually, gradually, i i became became used used to to seeing seeing the the gentleman gentleman with with the the black black whiskers. whiskers. i i liked liked him him no no better better than than at at first, first, and and had had the the same same uneasy uneasy jealousy jealousy of of him; him; but but if if i i had had any any reason reason for for it it beyond beyond a a child's child's instinctive instinctive dislike, dislike, and and a a general general idea idea that that peggotty peggotty and and i i could could make make much much of of my my mother mother without without any any help, help, it it certainly certainly was was not not the the reason reason that that i i might might have have found found if if i i had had been been older. older. no no such such thing thing came came into into my my mind, mind, or or near near it. it. i i could could observe, observe, in in little little pieces, pieces, as as it it were; were; but but as as to to making making a a net net of of a a number number of of these these pieces, pieces, and and catching catching anybody anybody in in it, it, that that was, was, as as yet, yet, beyond beyond me. me. one one autumn autumn morning morning i i was was with with my my mother mother in in the the front front garden, garden, when when mr. mr. murdstone murdstone -- -- i i knew knew him him by by that that name name now now -- -- came came by, by, on on horseback. horseback. he he reined reined up up his his horse horse to to salute salute my my mother, mother, and and said said he he was was going going to to lowestoft lowestoft to to see see some some friends friends who who were were there there with with a a yacht, yacht, and and merrily merrily proposed proposed to to take take me me on on the the saddle saddle before before him him if if i i would would like like the the ride. ride. the the air air was was so so clear clear and and pleasant, pleasant, and and the the horse horse seemed seemed to to like like the the idea idea of of the the ride ride so so much much himself, himself, as as he he stood stood snorting snorting and and pawing pawing at at the the garden-gate, garden-gate, that that i i had had a a great great desire desire to to go. go. so so i i was was sent sent upstairs upstairs to to peggotty peggotty to to be be made made spruce; spruce; and and in in the the meantime meantime mr. mr. murdstone murdstone dismounted, dismounted, and, and, with with his his horse's horse's bridle bridle drawn drawn over over his his arm, arm, walked walked slowly slowly up up and and down down on on the the outer outer side side of of the the sweetbriar sweetbriar fence, fence, while while my my mother mother walked walked slowly slowly up up and and down down on on the the inner inner to to keep keep him him company. company. i i recollect recollect peggotty peggotty and and i i peeping peeping out out at at them them from from my my little little window; window; i i recollect recollect how how closely closely they they seemed seemed to to be be examining examining the the sweetbriar sweetbriar between between them, them, as as they they strolled strolled along; along; and and how, how, from from being being in in a a perfectly perfectly angelic angelic temper, temper, peggotty peggotty turned turned cross cross in in a a moment, moment, and and brushed brushed my my hair hair the the wrong wrong way, way, excessively excessively hard. hard. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone and and i i were were soon soon off, off, and and trotting trotting along along on on the the green green turf turf by by the the side side of of the the road. road. he he held held me me quite quite easily easily with with one one arm, arm, and and i i don't don't think think i i was was restless restless usually; usually; but but i i could could not not make make up up my my mind mind to to sit sit in in front front of of him him without without turning turning my my head head sometimes, sometimes, and and looking looking up up in in his his face. face. he he had had that that kind kind of of shallow shallow black black eye eye -- -- i i want want a a better better word word to to express express an an eye eye that that has has no no depth depth in in it it to to be be looked looked into into -- -- which, which, when when it it is is abstracted, abstracted, seems seems from from some some peculiarity peculiarity of of light light to to be be disfigured, disfigured, for for a a moment moment at at a a time, time, by by a a cast. cast. several several times times when when i i glanced glanced at at him, him, i i observed observed that that appearance appearance with with a a sort sort of of awe, awe, and and wondered wondered what what he he was was thinking thinking about about so so closely. closely. his his hair hair and and whiskers whiskers were were blacker blacker and and thicker, thicker, looked looked at at so so near, near, than than even even i i had had given given them them credit credit for for being. being. a a squareness squareness about about the the lower lower part part of of his his face, face, and and the the dotted dotted indication indication of of the the strong strong black black beard beard he he shaved shaved close close every every day, day, reminded reminded me me of of the the wax-work wax-work that that had had travelled travelled into into our our neighbourhood neighbourhood some some half-a-year half-a-year before. before. this, this, his his regular regular eyebrows, eyebrows, and and the the rich rich white, white, and and black, black, and and brown, brown, of of his his complexion complexion -- -- confound confound his his complexion, complexion, and and his his memory! memory! -- -- made made me me think think him, him, in in spite spite of of my my misgivings, misgivings, a a very very handsome handsome man. man. i i have have no no doubt doubt that that my my poor poor dear dear mother mother thought thought him him so so too. too. we we went went to to an an hotel hotel by by the the sea, sea, where where two two gentlemen gentlemen were were smoking smoking cigars cigars in in a a room room by by themselves. themselves. each each of of them them was was lying lying on on at at least least four four chairs, chairs, and and had had a a large large rough rough jacket jacket on. on. in in a a corner corner was was a a heap heap of of coats coats and and boat-cloaks, boat-cloaks, and and a a flag, flag, all all bundled bundled up up together. together. they they both both rolled rolled on on to to their their feet feet in in an an untidy untidy sort sort of of manner, manner, when when we we came came in, in, and and said, said, 'halloa, 'halloa, murdstone! murdstone! we we thought thought you were were dead!' dead!' 'not 'not yet,' yet,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'and 'and who's who's this this shaver?' shaver?' said said one one of of the the gentlemen, gentlemen, taking taking hold hold of of me. me. 'that's 'that's davy,' davy,' returned returned mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'davy 'davy who?' who?' said said the the gentleman. gentleman. 'jones?' 'jones?' 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'what! 'what! bewitching bewitching mrs. mrs. copperfield's copperfield's encumbrance?' encumbrance?' cried cried the the gentleman. gentleman. 'the 'the pretty pretty little little widow?' widow?' 'quinion,' 'quinion,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'take 'take care, care, if if you please. please. somebody's somebody's sharp.' sharp.' 'who 'who is?' is?' asked asked the the gentleman, gentleman, laughing. laughing. i i looked looked up, up, quickly; quickly; being being curious curious to to know. know. 'only 'only brooks brooks of of sheffield,' sheffield,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. i i was was quite quite relieved relieved to to find find that that it it was was only only brooks brooks of of sheffield; sheffield; for, for, at at first, first, i i really really thought thought it it was was i. i. there there seemed seemed to to be be something something very very comical comical in in the the reputation reputation of of mr. mr. brooks brooks of of sheffield, sheffield, for for both both the the gentlemen gentlemen laughed laughed heartily heartily when when he he was was mentioned, mentioned, and and mr. mr. murdstone murdstone was was a a good good deal deal amused amused also. also. after after some some laughing, laughing, the the gentleman gentleman whom whom he he had had called called quinion, quinion, said: said: 'and 'and what what is is the the opinion opinion of of brooks brooks of of sheffield, sheffield, in in reference reference to to the the projected projected business?' business?' 'why, 'why, i i don't don't know know that that brooks brooks understands understands much much about about it it at at present,' present,' replied replied mr. mr. murdstone; murdstone; 'but 'but he he is is not not generally generally favourable, favourable, i i believe.' believe.' there there was was more more laughter laughter at at this, this, and and mr. mr. quinion quinion said said he he would would ring ring the the bell bell for for some some sherry sherry in in which which to to drink drink to to brooks. brooks. this this he he did; did; and and when when the the wine wine came, came, he he made made me me have have a a little, little, with with a a biscuit, biscuit, and, and, before before i i drank drank it, it, stand stand up up and and say, say, 'confusion 'confusion to to brooks brooks of of sheffield!' sheffield!' the the toast toast was was received received with with great great applause, applause, and and such such hearty hearty laughter laughter that that it it made made me me laugh laugh too; too; at at which which they they laughed laughed the the more. more. in in short, short, we we quite quite enjoyed enjoyed ourselves. ourselves. we we walked walked about about on on the the cliff cliff after after that, that, and and sat sat on on the the grass, grass, and and looked looked at at things things through through a a telescope telescope -- -- i i could could make make out out nothing nothing myself myself when when it it was was put put to to my my eye, eye, but but i i pretended pretended i i could could -- -- and and then then we we came came back back to to the the hotel hotel to to an an early early dinner. dinner. all all the the time time we we were were out, out, the the two two gentlemen gentlemen smoked smoked incessantly incessantly -- -- which, which, i i thought, thought, if if i i might might judge judge from from the the smell smell of of their their rough rough coats, coats, they they must must have have been been doing, doing, ever ever since since the the coats coats had had first first come come home home from from the the tailor's. tailor's. i i must must not not forget forget that that we we went went on on board board the the yacht, yacht, where where they they all all three three descended descended into into the the cabin, cabin, and and were were busy busy with with some some papers. papers. i i saw saw them them quite quite hard hard at at work, work, when when i i looked looked down down through through the the open open skylight. skylight. they they left left me, me, during during this this time, time, with with a a very very nice nice man man with with a a very very large large head head of of red red hair hair and and a a very very small small shiny shiny hat hat upon upon it, it, who who had had got got a a cross-barred cross-barred shirt shirt or or waistcoat waistcoat on, on, with with 'skylark' 'skylark' in in capital capital letters letters across across the the chest. chest. i i thought thought it it was was his his name; name; and and that that as as he he lived lived on on board board ship ship and and hadn't hadn't a a street street door door to to put put his his name name on, on, he he put put it it there there instead; instead; but but when when i i called called him him mr. mr. skylark, skylark, he he said said it it meant meant the the vessel. vessel. i i observed observed all all day day that that mr. mr. murdstone murdstone was was graver graver and and steadier steadier than than the the two two gentlemen. gentlemen. they they were were very very gay gay and and careless. careless. they they joked joked freely freely with with one one another, another, but but seldom seldom with with him. him. it it appeared appeared to to me me that that he he was was more more clever clever and and cold cold than than they they were, were, and and that that they they regarded regarded him him with with something something of of my my own own feeling. feeling. i i remarked remarked that, that, once once or or twice twice when when mr. mr. quinion quinion was was talking, talking, he he looked looked at at mr. mr. murdstone murdstone sideways, sideways, as as if if to to make make sure sure of of his his not not being being displeased; displeased; and and that that once once when when mr. mr. passnidge passnidge (the (the other other gentleman) gentleman) was was in in high high spirits, spirits, he he trod trod upon upon his his foot, foot, and and gave gave him him a a secret secret caution caution with with his his eyes, eyes, to to observe observe mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, who who was was sitting sitting stern stern and and silent. silent. nor nor do do i i recollect recollect that that mr. mr. murdstone murdstone laughed laughed at at all all that that day, day, except except at at the the sheffield sheffield joke joke -- -- and and that, that, by by the the by, by, was was his his own. own. we we went went home home early early in in the the evening. evening. it it was was a a very very fine fine evening, evening, and and my my mother mother and and he he had had another another stroll stroll by by the the sweetbriar, sweetbriar, while while i i was was sent sent in in to to get get my my tea. tea. when when he he was was gone, gone, my my mother mother asked asked me me all all about about the the day day i i had had had, had, and and what what they they had had said said and and done. done. i i mentioned mentioned what what they they had had said said about about her, her, and and she she laughed, laughed, and and told told me me they they were were impudent impudent fellows fellows who who talked talked nonsense nonsense -- -- but but i i knew knew it it pleased pleased her. her. i i knew knew it it quite quite as as well well as as i i know know it it now. now. i i took took the the opportunity opportunity of of asking asking if if she she was was at at all all acquainted acquainted with with mr. mr. brooks brooks of of sheffield, sheffield, but but she she answered answered no, no, only only she she supposed supposed he he must must be be a a manufacturer manufacturer in in the the knife knife and and fork fork way. way. can can i i say say of of her her face face -- -- altered altered as as i i have have reason reason to to remember remember it, it, perished perished as as i i know know it it is is -- -- that that it it is is gone, gone, when when here here it it comes comes before before me me at at this this instant, instant, as as distinct distinct as as any any face face that that i i may may choose choose to to look look on on in in a a crowded crowded street? street? can can i i say say of of her her innocent innocent and and girlish girlish beauty, beauty, that that it it faded, faded, and and was was no no more, more, when when its its breath breath falls falls on on my my cheek cheek now, now, as as it it fell fell that that night? night? can can i i say say she she ever ever changed, changed, when when my my remembrance remembrance brings brings her her back back to to life, life, thus thus only; only; and, and, truer truer to to its its loving loving youth youth than than i i have have been, been, or or man man ever ever is, is, still still holds holds fast fast what what it it cherished cherished then? then? i i write write of of her her just just as as she she was was when when i i had had gone gone to to bed bed after after this this talk, talk, and and she she came came to to bid bid me me good good night. night. she she kneeled kneeled down down playfully playfully by by the the side side of of the the bed, bed, and and laying laying her her chin chin upon upon her her hands, hands, and and laughing, laughing, said: said: 'what 'what was was it it they they said, said, davy? davy? tell tell me me again. again. i i can't can't believe believe it.' it.' '"bewitching '"bewitching -- -- "' "' i i began. began. my my mother mother put put her her hands hands upon upon my my lips lips to to stop stop me. me. 'it 'it was was never never bewitching,' bewitching,' she she said, said, laughing. laughing. 'it 'it never never could could have have been been bewitching, bewitching, davy. davy. now now i i know know it it wasn't!' wasn't!' 'yes, 'yes, it it was. was. "bewitching "bewitching mrs. mrs. copperfield",' copperfield",' i i repeated repeated stoutly. stoutly. 'and, 'and, "pretty."' "pretty."' 'no, 'no, no, no, it it was was never never pretty. pretty. not not pretty,' pretty,' interposed interposed my my mother, mother, laying laying her her fingers fingers on on my my lips lips again. again. 'yes 'yes it it was. was. "pretty "pretty little little widow."' widow."' 'what 'what foolish, foolish, impudent impudent creatures!' creatures!' cried cried my my mother, mother, laughing laughing and and covering covering her her face. face. 'what 'what ridiculous ridiculous men! men! an't an't they? they? davy davy dear dear -- -- ' ' 'well, 'well, ma.' ma.' 'don't 'don't tell tell peggotty; peggotty; she she might might be be angry angry with with them. them. i i am am dreadfully dreadfully angry angry with with them them myself; myself; but but i i would would rather rather peggotty peggotty didn't didn't know.' know.' i i promised, promised, of of course; course; and and we we kissed kissed one one another another over over and and over over again, again, and and i i soon soon fell fell fast fast asleep. asleep. it it seems seems to to me, me, at at this this distance distance of of time, time, as as if if it it were were the the next next day day when when peggotty peggotty broached broached the the striking striking and and adventurous adventurous proposition proposition i i am am about about to to mention; mention; but but it it was was probably probably about about two two months months afterwards. afterwards. we we were were sitting sitting as as before, before, one one evening evening (when (when my my mother mother was was out out as as before), before), in in company company with with the the stocking stocking and and the the yard-measure, yard-measure, and and the the bit bit of of wax, wax, and and the the box box with with st. st. paul's paul's on on the the lid, lid, and and the the crocodile crocodile book, book, when when peggotty, peggotty, after after looking looking at at me me several several times, times, and and opening opening her her mouth mouth as as if if she she were were going going to to speak, speak, without without doing doing it it -- -- which which i i thought thought was was merely merely gaping, gaping, or or i i should should have have been been rather rather alarmed alarmed -- -- said said coaxingly: coaxingly: 'master 'master davy, davy, how how should should you like like to to go go along along with with me me and and spend spend a a fortnight fortnight at at my my brother's brother's at at yarmouth? yarmouth? wouldn't wouldn't that that be be a a treat?' treat?' 'is 'is your your brother brother an an agreeable agreeable man, man, peggotty?' peggotty?' i i inquired, inquired, provisionally. provisionally. 'oh, 'oh, what what an an agreeable agreeable man man he he is!' is!' cried cried peggotty, peggotty, holding holding up up her her hands. hands. 'then 'then there's there's the the sea; sea; and and the the boats boats and and ships; ships; and and the the fishermen; fishermen; and and the the beach; beach; and and am am to to play play with with -- -- ' ' peggotty peggotty meant meant her her nephew nephew ham, ham, mentioned mentioned in in my my first first chapter; chapter; but but she she spoke spoke of of him him as as a a morsel morsel of of english english grammar. grammar. i i was was flushed flushed by by her her summary summary of of delights, delights, and and replied replied that that it it would would indeed indeed be be a a treat, treat, but but what what would would my my mother mother say? say? 'why 'why then then i'll i'll as as good good as as bet bet a a guinea,' guinea,' said said peggotty, peggotty, intent intent upon upon my my face, face, 'that 'that she'll she'll let let us us go. go. i'll i'll ask ask her, her, if if you like, like, as as soon soon as as ever ever she she comes comes home. home. there there now!' now!' 'but 'but what's what's she she to to do do while while we're we're away?' away?' said said i, i, putting putting my my small small elbows elbows on on the the table table to to argue argue the the point. point. 'she 'she can't can't live live by by herself.' herself.' if if peggotty peggotty were were looking looking for for a a hole, hole, all all of of a a sudden, sudden, in in the the heel heel of of that that stocking, stocking, it it must must have have been been a a very very little little one one indeed, indeed, and and not not worth worth darning. darning. 'i 'i say! say! peggotty! peggotty! she she can't can't live live by by herself, herself, you know.' know.' 'oh, 'oh, bless bless you!' said said peggotty, peggotty, looking looking at at me me again again at at last. last. 'don't 'don't you know? know? she's she's going going to to stay stay for for a a fortnight fortnight with with mrs. mrs. grayper. grayper. mrs. mrs. grayper's grayper's going going to to have have a a lot lot of of company.' company.' oh! oh! if if that that was was it, it, i i was was quite quite ready ready to to go. go. i i waited, waited, in in the the utmost utmost impatience, impatience, until until my my mother mother came came home home from from mrs. mrs. grayper's grayper's (for (for it it was was that that identical identical neighbour), neighbour), to to ascertain ascertain if if we we could could get get leave leave to to carry carry out out this this great great idea. idea. without without being being nearly nearly so so much much surprised surprised as as i i had had expected, expected, my my mother mother entered entered into into it it readily; readily; and and it it was was all all arranged arranged that that night, night, and and my my board board and and lodging lodging during during the the visit visit were were to to be be paid paid for. for. the the day day soon soon came came for for our our going. going. it it was was such such an an early early day day that that it it came came soon, soon, even even to to me, me, who who was was in in a a fever fever of of expectation, expectation, and and half half afraid afraid that that an an earthquake earthquake or or a a fiery fiery mountain, mountain, or or some some other other great great convulsion convulsion of of nature, nature, might might interpose interpose to to stop stop the the expedition. expedition. we we were were to to go go in in a a carrier's carrier's cart, cart, which which departed departed in in the the morning morning after after breakfast. breakfast. i i would would have have given given any any money money to to have have been been allowed allowed to to wrap wrap myself myself up up over-night, over-night, and and sleep sleep in in my my hat hat and and boots. boots. it it touches touches me me nearly nearly now, now, although although i i tell tell it it lightly, lightly, to to recollect recollect how how eager eager i i was was to to leave leave my my happy happy home; home; to to think think how how little little i i suspected suspected what what i i did did leave leave for for ever. ever. i i am am glad glad to to recollect recollect that that when when the the carrier's carrier's cart cart was was at at the the gate, gate, and and my my mother mother stood stood there there kissing kissing me, me, a a grateful grateful fondness fondness for for her her and and for for the the old old place place i i had had never never turned turned my my back back upon upon before, before, made made me me cry. cry. i i am am glad glad to to know know that that my my mother mother cried cried too, too, and and that that i i felt felt her her heart heart beat beat against against mine. mine. i i am am glad glad to to recollect recollect that that when when the the carrier carrier began began to to move, move, my my mother mother ran ran out out at at the the gate, gate, and and called called to to him him to to stop, stop, that that she she might might kiss kiss me me once once more. more. i i am am glad glad to to dwell dwell upon upon the the earnestness earnestness and and love love with with which which she she lifted lifted up up her her face face to to mine, mine, and and did did so. so. as as we we left left her her standing standing in in the the road, road, mr. mr. murdstone murdstone came came up up to to where where she she was, was, and and seemed seemed to to expostulate expostulate with with her her for for being being so so moved. moved. i i was was looking looking back back round round the the awning awning of of the the cart, cart, and and wondered wondered what what business business it it was was of of his. his. peggotty, peggotty, who who was was also also looking looking back back on on the the other other side, side, seemed seemed anything anything but but satisfied; satisfied; as as the the face face she she brought brought back back in in the the cart cart denoted. denoted. i i sat sat looking looking at at peggotty peggotty for for some some time, time, in in a a reverie reverie on on this this supposititious supposititious case: case: whether, whether, if if she she were were employed employed to to lose lose me me like like the the boy boy in in the the fairy fairy tale, tale, i i should should be be able able to to track track my my way way home home again again by by the the buttons buttons she she would would shed. shed. chapter chapter 3. 3. i i have have a a change change the the carrier's carrier's horse horse was was the the laziest laziest horse horse in in the the world, world, i i should should hope, hope, and and shuffled shuffled along, along, with with his his head head down, down, as as if if he he liked liked to to keep keep people people waiting waiting to to whom whom the the packages packages were were directed. directed. i i fancied, fancied, indeed, indeed, that that he he sometimes sometimes chuckled chuckled audibly audibly over over this this reflection, reflection, but but the the carrier carrier said said he he was was only only troubled troubled with with a a cough. cough. the the carrier carrier had had a a way way of of keeping keeping his his head head down, down, like like his his horse, horse, and and of of drooping drooping sleepily sleepily forward forward as as he he drove, drove, with with one one of of his his arms arms on on each each of of his his knees. knees. i i say say 'drove', 'drove', but but it it struck struck me me that that the the cart cart would would have have gone gone to to yarmouth yarmouth quite quite as as well well without without him, him, for for the the horse horse did did all all that; that; and and as as to to conversation, conversation, he he had had no no idea idea of of it it but but whistling. whistling. peggotty peggotty had had a a basket basket of of refreshments refreshments on on her her knee, knee, which which would would have have lasted lasted us us out out handsomely, handsomely, if if we we had had been been going going to to london london by by the the same same conveyance. conveyance. we we ate ate a a good good deal, deal, and and slept slept a a good good deal. deal. peggotty peggotty always always went went to to sleep sleep with with her her chin chin upon upon the the handle handle of of the the basket, basket, her her hold hold of of which which never never relaxed; relaxed; and and i i could could not not have have believed believed unless unless i i had had heard heard her her do do it, it, that that one one defenceless defenceless woman woman could could have have snored snored so so much. much. we we made made so so many many deviations deviations up up and and down down lanes, lanes, and and were were such such a a long long time time delivering delivering a a bedstead bedstead at at a a public-house, public-house, and and calling calling at at other other places, places, that that i i was was quite quite tired, tired, and and very very glad, glad, when when we we saw saw yarmouth. yarmouth. it it looked looked rather rather spongy spongy and and soppy, soppy, i i thought, thought, as as i i carried carried my my eye eye over over the the great great dull dull waste waste that that lay lay across across the the river; river; and and i i could could not not help help wondering, wondering, if if the the world world were were really really as as round round as as my my geography geography book book said, said, how how any any part part of of it it came came to to be be so so flat. flat. but but i i reflected reflected that that yarmouth yarmouth might might be be situated situated at at one one of of the the poles; poles; which which would would account account for for it. it. as as we we drew drew a a little little nearer, nearer, and and saw saw the the whole whole adjacent adjacent prospect prospect lying lying a a straight straight low low line line under under the the sky, sky, i i hinted hinted to to peggotty peggotty that that a a mound mound or or so so might might have have improved improved it; it; and and also also that that if if the the land land had had been been a a little little more more separated separated from from the the sea, sea, and and the the town town and and the the tide tide had had not not been been quite quite so so much much mixed mixed up, up, like like toast toast and and water, water, it it would would have have been been nicer. nicer. but but peggotty peggotty said, said, with with greater greater emphasis emphasis than than usual, usual, that that we we must must take take things things as as we we found found them, them, and and that, that, for for her her part, part, she she was was proud proud to to call call herself herself a a yarmouth yarmouth bloater. bloater. when when we we got got into into the the street street (which (which was was strange strange enough enough to to me) me) and and smelt smelt the the fish, fish, and and pitch, pitch, and and oakum, oakum, and and tar, tar, and and saw saw the the sailors sailors walking walking about, about, and and the the carts carts jingling jingling up up and and down down over over the the stones, stones, i i felt felt that that i i had had done done so so busy busy a a place place an an injustice; injustice; and and said said as as much much to to peggotty, peggotty, who who heard heard my my expressions expressions of of delight delight with with great great complacency, complacency, and and told told me me it it was was well well known known (i (i suppose suppose to to those those who who had had the the good good fortune fortune to to be be born born bloaters) bloaters) that that yarmouth yarmouth was, was, upon upon the the whole, whole, the the finest finest place place in in the the universe. universe. 'here's 'here's my my am!' am!' screamed screamed peggotty, peggotty, 'growed 'growed out out of of knowledge!' knowledge!' he he was was waiting waiting for for us, us, in in fact, fact, at at the the public-house; public-house; and and asked asked me me how how i i found found myself, myself, like like an an old old acquaintance. acquaintance. i i did did not not feel, feel, at at first, first, that that i i knew knew him him as as well well as as he he knew knew me, me, because because he he had had never never come come to to our our house house since since the the night night i i was was born, born, and and naturally naturally he he had had the the advantage advantage of of me. me. but but our our intimacy intimacy was was much much advanced advanced by by his his taking taking me me on on his his back back to to carry carry me me home. home. he he was, was, now, now, a a huge, huge, strong strong fellow fellow of of six six feet feet high, high, broad broad in in proportion, proportion, and and round-shouldered; round-shouldered; but but with with a a simpering simpering boy's boy's face face and and curly curly light light hair hair that that gave gave him him quite quite a a sheepish sheepish look. look. he he was was dressed dressed in in a a canvas canvas jacket, jacket, and and a a pair pair of of such such very very stiff stiff trousers trousers that that they they would would have have stood stood quite quite as as well well alone, alone, without without any any legs legs in in them. them. and and you couldn't couldn't so so properly properly have have said said he he wore wore a a hat, hat, as as that that he he was was covered covered in in a-top, a-top, like like an an old old building, building, with with something something pitchy. pitchy. ham ham carrying carrying me me on on his his back back and and a a small small box box of of ours ours under under his his arm, arm, and and peggotty peggotty carrying carrying another another small small box box of of ours, ours, we we turned turned down down lanes lanes bestrewn bestrewn with with bits bits of of chips chips and and little little hillocks hillocks of of sand, sand, and and went went past past gas-works, gas-works, rope-walks, rope-walks, boat-builders' boat-builders' yards, yards, shipwrights' shipwrights' yards, yards, ship-breakers' ship-breakers' yards, yards, caulkers' caulkers' yards, yards, riggers' riggers' lofts, lofts, smiths' smiths' forges, forges, and and a a great great litter litter of of such such places, places, until until we we came came out out upon upon the the dull dull waste waste i i had had already already seen seen at at a a distance; distance; when when ham ham said, said, 'yon's 'yon's our our house, house, mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' i i looked looked in in all all directions, directions, as as far far as as i i could could stare stare over over the the wilderness, wilderness, and and away away at at the the sea, sea, and and away away at at the the river, river, but but no no house house could could i i make make out. out. there there was was a a black black barge, barge, or or some some other other kind kind of of superannuated superannuated boat, boat, not not far far off, off, high high and and dry dry on on the the ground, ground, with with an an iron iron funnel funnel sticking sticking out out of of it it for for a a chimney chimney and and smoking smoking very very cosily; cosily; but but nothing nothing else else in in the the way way of of a a habitation habitation that that was was visible visible to to me. me. 'that's 'that's not not it?' it?' said said i. i. 'that 'that ship-looking ship-looking thing?' thing?' 'that's 'that's it, it, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' returned returned ham. ham. if if it it had had been been aladdin's aladdin's palace, palace, roc's roc's egg egg and and all, all, i i suppose suppose i i could could not not have have been been more more charmed charmed with with the the romantic romantic idea idea of of living living in in it. it. there there was was a a delightful delightful door door cut cut in in the the side, side, and and it it was was roofed roofed in, in, and and there there were were little little windows windows in in it; it; but but the the wonderful wonderful charm charm of of it it was, was, that that it it was was a a real real boat boat which which had had no no doubt doubt been been upon upon the the water water hundreds hundreds of of times, times, and and which which had had never never been been intended intended to to be be lived lived in, in, on on dry dry land. land. that that was was the the captivation captivation of of it it to to me. me. if if it it had had ever ever been been meant meant to to be be lived lived in, in, i i might might have have thought thought it it small, small, or or inconvenient, inconvenient, or or lonely; lonely; but but never never having having been been designed designed for for any any such such use, use, it it became became a a perfect perfect abode. abode. it it was was beautifully beautifully clean clean inside, inside, and and as as tidy tidy as as possible. possible. there there was was a a table, table, and and a a dutch dutch clock, clock, and and a a chest chest of of drawers, drawers, and and on on the the chest chest of of drawers drawers there there was was a a tea-tray tea-tray with with a a painting painting on on it it of of a a lady lady with with a a parasol, parasol, taking taking a a walk walk with with a a military-looking military-looking child child who who was was trundling trundling a a hoop. hoop. the the tray tray was was kept kept from from tumbling tumbling down, down, by by a a bible; bible; and and the the tray, tray, if if it it had had tumbled tumbled down, down, would would have have smashed smashed a a quantity quantity of of cups cups and and saucers saucers and and a a teapot teapot that that were were grouped grouped around around the the book. book. on on the the walls walls there there were were some some common common coloured coloured pictures, pictures, framed framed and and glazed, glazed, of of scripture scripture subjects; subjects; such such as as i i have have never never seen seen since since in in the the hands hands of of pedlars, pedlars, without without seeing seeing the the whole whole interior interior of of peggotty's peggotty's brother's brother's house house again, again, at at one one view. view. abraham abraham in in red red going going to to sacrifice sacrifice isaac isaac in in blue, blue, and and daniel daniel in in yellow yellow cast cast into into a a den den of of green green lions, lions, were were the the most most prominent prominent of of these. these. over over the the little little mantelshelf, mantelshelf, was was a a picture picture of of the the 'sarah 'sarah jane' jane' lugger, lugger, built built at at sunderland, sunderland, with with a a real real little little wooden wooden stern stern stuck stuck on on to to it; it; a a work work of of art, art, combining combining composition composition with with carpentry, carpentry, which which i i considered considered to to be be one one of of the the most most enviable enviable possessions possessions that that the the world world could could afford. afford. there there were were some some hooks hooks in in the the beams beams of of the the ceiling, ceiling, the the use use of of which which i i did did not not divine divine then; then; and and some some lockers lockers and and boxes boxes and and conveniences conveniences of of that that sort, sort, which which served served for for seats seats and and eked eked out out the the chairs. chairs. all all this this i i saw saw in in the the first first glance glance after after i i crossed crossed the the threshold threshold -- -- child-like, child-like, according according to to my my theory theory -- -- and and then then peggotty peggotty opened opened a a little little door door and and showed showed me me my my bedroom. bedroom. it it was was the the completest completest and and most most desirable desirable bedroom bedroom ever ever seen seen -- -- in in the the stern stern of of the the vessel; vessel; with with a a little little window, window, where where the the rudder rudder used used to to go go through; through; a a little little looking-glass, looking-glass, just just the the right right height height for for me, me, nailed nailed against against the the wall, wall, and and framed framed with with oyster-shells; oyster-shells; a a little little bed, bed, which which there there was was just just room room enough enough to to get get into; into; and and a a nosegay nosegay of of seaweed seaweed in in a a blue blue mug mug on on the the table. table. the the walls walls were were whitewashed whitewashed as as white white as as milk, milk, and and the the patchwork patchwork counterpane counterpane made made my my eyes eyes quite quite ache ache with with its its brightness. brightness. one one thing thing i i particularly particularly noticed noticed in in this this delightful delightful house, house, was was the the smell smell of of fish; fish; which which was was so so searching, searching, that that when when i i took took out out my my pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief to to wipe wipe my my nose, nose, i i found found it it smelt smelt exactly exactly as as if if it it had had wrapped wrapped up up a a lobster. lobster. on on my my imparting imparting this this discovery discovery in in confidence confidence to to peggotty, peggotty, she she informed informed me me that that her her brother brother dealt dealt in in lobsters, lobsters, crabs, crabs, and and crawfish; crawfish; and and i i afterwards afterwards found found that that a a heap heap of of these these creatures, creatures, in in a a state state of of wonderful wonderful conglomeration conglomeration with with one one another, another, and and never never leaving leaving off off pinching pinching whatever whatever they they laid laid hold hold of, of, were were usually usually to to be be found found in in a a little little wooden wooden outhouse outhouse where where the the pots pots and and kettles kettles were were kept. kept. we we were were welcomed welcomed by by a a very very civil civil woman woman in in a a white white apron, apron, whom whom i i had had seen seen curtseying curtseying at at the the door door when when i i was was on on ham's ham's back, back, about about a a quarter quarter of of a a mile mile off. off. likewise likewise by by a a most most beautiful beautiful little little girl girl (or (or i i thought thought her her so) so) with with a a necklace necklace of of blue blue beads beads on, on, who who wouldn't wouldn't let let me me kiss kiss her her when when i i offered offered to, to, but but ran ran away away and and hid hid herself. herself. by by and and by, by, when when we we had had dined dined in in a a sumptuous sumptuous manner manner off off boiled boiled dabs, dabs, melted melted butter, butter, and and potatoes, potatoes, with with a a chop chop for for me, me, a a hairy hairy man man with with a a very very good-natured good-natured face face came came home. home. as as he he called called peggotty peggotty 'lass', 'lass', and and gave gave her her a a hearty hearty smack smack on on the the cheek, cheek, i i had had no no doubt, doubt, from from the the general general propriety propriety of of her her conduct, conduct, that that he he was was her her brother; brother; and and so so he he turned turned out out -- -- being being presently presently introduced introduced to to me me as as mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, the the master master of of the the house. house. 'glad 'glad to to see see you, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'you'll 'you'll find find us us rough, rough, sir, sir, but but you'll you'll find find us us ready.' ready.' i i thanked thanked him, him, and and replied replied that that i i was was sure sure i i should should be be happy happy in in such such a a delightful delightful place. place. 'how's 'how's your your ma, ma, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'did 'did you leave leave her her pretty pretty jolly?' jolly?' i i gave gave mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to understand understand that that she she was was as as jolly jolly as as i i could could wish, wish, and and that that she she desired desired her her compliments compliments -- -- which which was was a a polite polite fiction fiction on on my my part. part. 'i'm 'i'm much much obleeged obleeged to to her, her, i'm i'm sure,' sure,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'well, 'well, sir, sir, if if you can can make make out out here, here, fur fur a a fortnut, fortnut, 'long 'long wi' wi' her,' her,' nodding nodding at at his his sister, sister, 'and 'and ham, ham, and and little little em'ly, em'ly, we we shall shall be be proud proud of of your your company.' company.' having having done done the the honours honours of of his his house house in in this this hospitable hospitable manner, manner, mr. mr. peggotty peggotty went went out out to to wash wash himself himself in in a a kettleful kettleful of of hot hot water, water, remarking remarking that that 'cold 'cold would would never never get get his his muck muck off'. off'. he he soon soon returned, returned, greatly greatly improved improved in in appearance; appearance; but but so so rubicund, rubicund, that that i i couldn't couldn't help help thinking thinking his his face face had had this this in in common common with with the the lobsters, lobsters, crabs, crabs, and and crawfish, crawfish, -- -- that that it it went went into into the the hot hot water water very very black, black, and and came came out out very very red. red. after after tea, tea, when when the the door door was was shut shut and and all all was was made made snug snug (the (the nights nights being being cold cold and and misty misty now), now), it it seemed seemed to to me me the the most most delicious delicious retreat retreat that that the the imagination imagination of of man man could could conceive. conceive. to to hear hear the the wind wind getting getting up up out out at at sea, sea, to to know know that that the the fog fog was was creeping creeping over over the the desolate desolate flat flat outside, outside, and and to to look look at at the the fire, fire, and and think think that that there there was was no no house house near near but but this this one, one, and and this this one one a a boat, boat, was was like like enchantment. enchantment. little little em'ly em'ly had had overcome overcome her her shyness, shyness, and and was was sitting sitting by by my my side side upon upon the the lowest lowest and and least least of of the the lockers, lockers, which which was was just just large large enough enough for for us us two, two, and and just just fitted fitted into into the the chimney chimney corner. corner. mrs. mrs. peggotty peggotty with with the the white white apron, apron, was was knitting knitting on on the the opposite opposite side side of of the the fire. fire. peggotty peggotty at at her her needlework needlework was was as as much much at at home home with with st. st. paul's paul's and and the the bit bit of of wax-candle, wax-candle, as as if if they they had had never never known known any any other other roof. roof. ham, ham, who who had had been been giving giving me me my my first first lesson lesson in in all-fours, all-fours, was was trying trying to to recollect recollect a a scheme scheme of of telling telling fortunes fortunes with with the the dirty dirty cards, cards, and and was was printing printing off off fishy fishy impressions impressions of of his his thumb thumb on on all all the the cards cards he he turned. turned. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was smoking smoking his his pipe. pipe. i i felt felt it it was was a a time time for for conversation conversation and and confidence. confidence. 'mr. 'mr. peggotty!' peggotty!' says says i. i. 'sir,' 'sir,' says says he. he. 'did 'did you give give your your son son the the name name of of ham, ham, because because you lived lived in in a a sort sort of of ark?' ark?' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty seemed seemed to to think think it it a a deep deep idea, idea, but but answered: answered: 'no, 'no, sir. sir. i i never never giv giv him him no no name.' name.' 'who 'who gave gave him him that that name, name, then?' then?' said said i, i, putting putting question question number number two two of of the the catechism catechism to to mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'why, 'why, sir, sir, his his father father giv giv it it him,' him,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i thought thought you were were his his father!' father!' 'my 'my brother brother joe joe was was his his father,' father,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'dead, 'dead, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' i i hinted, hinted, after after a a respectful respectful pause. pause. 'drowndead,' 'drowndead,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. i i was was very very much much surprised surprised that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was not not ham's ham's father, father, and and began began to to wonder wonder whether whether i i was was mistaken mistaken about about his his relationship relationship to to anybody anybody else else there. there. i i was was so so curious curious to to know, know, that that i i made made up up my my mind mind to to have have it it out out with with mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'little 'little em'ly,' em'ly,' i i said, said, glancing glancing at at her. her. 'she 'she is is your your daughter, daughter, isn't isn't she, she, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' 'no, 'no, sir. sir. my my brother-in-law, brother-in-law, tom, tom, was was her her father.' father.' i i couldn't couldn't help help it. it. ' ' -- -- dead, dead, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' i i hinted, hinted, after after another another respectful respectful silence. silence. 'drowndead,' 'drowndead,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. i i felt felt the the difficulty difficulty of of resuming resuming the the subject, subject, but but had had not not got got to to the the bottom bottom of of it it yet, yet, and and must must get get to to the the bottom bottom somehow. somehow. so so i i said: said: 'haven't 'haven't you any any children, children, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' 'no, 'no, master,' master,' he he answered answered with with a a short short laugh. laugh. 'i'm 'i'm a a bacheldore.' bacheldore.' 'a 'a bachelor!' bachelor!' i i said, said, astonished. astonished. 'why, 'why, who's who's that, that, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' pointing pointing to to the the person person in in the the apron apron who who was was knitting. knitting. 'that's 'that's missis missis gummidge,' gummidge,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'gummidge, 'gummidge, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' but but at at this this point point peggotty peggotty -- -- i i mean mean my my own own peculiar peculiar peggotty peggotty -- -- made made such such impressive impressive motions motions to to me me not not to to ask ask any any more more questions, questions, that that i i could could only only sit sit and and look look at at all all the the silent silent company, company, until until it it was was time time to to go go to to bed. bed. then, then, in in the the privacy privacy of of my my own own little little cabin, cabin, she she informed informed me me that that ham ham and and em'ly em'ly were were an an orphan orphan nephew nephew and and niece, niece, whom whom my my host host had had at at different different times times adopted adopted in in their their childhood, childhood, when when they they were were left left destitute: destitute: and and that that mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was the the widow widow of of his his partner partner in in a a boat, boat, who who had had died died very very poor. poor. he he was was but but a a poor poor man man himself, himself, said said peggotty, peggotty, but but as as good good as as gold gold and and as as true true as as steel steel -- -- those those were were her her similes. similes. the the only only subject, subject, she she informed informed me, me, on on which which he he ever ever showed showed a a violent violent temper temper or or swore swore an an oath, oath, was was this this generosity generosity of of his; his; and and if if it it were were ever ever referred referred to, to, by by any any one one of of them, them, he he struck struck the the table table a a heavy heavy blow blow with with his his right right hand hand (had (had split split it it on on one one such such occasion), occasion), and and swore swore a a dreadful dreadful oath oath that that he he would would be be 'gormed' 'gormed' if if he he didn't didn't cut cut and and run run for for good, good, if if it it was was ever ever mentioned mentioned again. again. it it appeared, appeared, in in answer answer to to my my inquiries, inquiries, that that nobody nobody had had the the least least idea idea of of the the etymology etymology of of this this terrible terrible verb verb passive passive to to be be gormed; gormed; but but that that they they all all regarded regarded it it as as constituting constituting a a most most solemn solemn imprecation. imprecation. i i was was very very sensible sensible of of my my entertainer's entertainer's goodness, goodness, and and listened listened to to the the women's women's going going to to bed bed in in another another little little crib crib like like mine mine at at the the opposite opposite end end of of the the boat, boat, and and to to him him and and ham ham hanging hanging up up two two hammocks hammocks for for themselves themselves on on the the hooks hooks i i had had noticed noticed in in the the roof, roof, in in a a very very luxurious luxurious state state of of mind, mind, enhanced enhanced by by my my being being sleepy. sleepy. as as slumber slumber gradually gradually stole stole upon upon me, me, i i heard heard the the wind wind howling howling out out at at sea sea and and coming coming on on across across the the flat flat so so fiercely, fiercely, that that i i had had a a lazy lazy apprehension apprehension of of the the great great deep deep rising rising in in the the night. night. but but i i bethought bethought myself myself that that i i was was in in a a boat, boat, after after all; all; and and that that a a man man like like mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was not not a a bad bad person person to to have have on on board board if if anything anything did did happen. happen. nothing nothing happened, happened, however, however, worse worse than than morning. morning. almost almost as as soon soon as as it it shone shone upon upon the the oyster-shell oyster-shell frame frame of of my my mirror mirror i i was was out out of of bed, bed, and and out out with with little little em'ly, em'ly, picking picking up up stones stones upon upon the the beach. beach. 'you're 'you're quite quite a a sailor, sailor, i i suppose?' suppose?' i i said said to to em'ly. em'ly. i i don't don't know know that that i i supposed supposed anything anything of of the the kind, kind, but but i i felt felt it it an an act act of of gallantry gallantry to to say say something; something; and and a a shining shining sail sail close close to to us us made made such such a a pretty pretty little little image image of of itself, itself, at at the the moment, moment, in in her her bright bright eye, eye, that that it it came came into into my my head head to to say say this. this. 'no,' 'no,' replied replied em'ly, em'ly, shaking shaking her her head, head, 'i'm 'i'm afraid afraid of of the the sea.' sea.' 'afraid!' 'afraid!' i i said, said, with with a a becoming becoming air air of of boldness, boldness, and and looking looking very very big big at at the the mighty mighty ocean. ocean. 'i 'i an't!' an't!' 'ah! 'ah! but but it's it's cruel,' cruel,' said said em'ly. em'ly. 'i 'i have have seen seen it it very very cruel cruel to to some some of of our our men. men. i i have have seen seen it it tear tear a a boat boat as as big big as as our our house, house, all all to to pieces.' pieces.' 'i 'i hope hope it it wasn't wasn't the the boat boat that that -- -- ' ' 'that 'that father father was was drownded drownded in?' in?' said said em'ly. em'ly. 'no. 'no. not not that that one, one, i i never never see see that that boat.' boat.' 'nor 'nor him?' him?' i i asked asked her. her. little little em'ly em'ly shook shook her her head. head. 'not 'not to to remember!' remember!' here here was was a a coincidence! coincidence! i i immediately immediately went went into into an an explanation explanation how how i i had had never never seen seen my my own own father; father; and and how how my my mother mother and and i i had had always always lived lived by by ourselves ourselves in in the the happiest happiest state state imaginable, imaginable, and and lived lived so so then, then, and and always always meant meant to to live live so; so; and and how how my my father's father's grave grave was was in in the the churchyard churchyard near near our our house, house, and and shaded shaded by by a a tree, tree, beneath beneath the the boughs boughs of of which which i i had had walked walked and and heard heard the the birds birds sing sing many many a a pleasant pleasant morning. morning. but but there there were were some some differences differences between between em'ly's em'ly's orphanhood orphanhood and and mine, mine, it it appeared. appeared. she she had had lost lost her her mother mother before before her her father; father; and and where where her her father's father's grave grave was was no no one one knew, knew, except except that that it it was was somewhere somewhere in in the the depths depths of of the the sea. sea. 'besides,' 'besides,' said said em'ly, em'ly, as as she she looked looked about about for for shells shells and and pebbles, pebbles, 'your 'your father father was was a a gentleman gentleman and and your your mother mother is is a a lady; lady; and and my my father father was was a a fisherman fisherman and and my my mother mother was was a a fisherman's fisherman's daughter, daughter, and and my my uncle uncle dan dan is is a a fisherman.' fisherman.' 'dan 'dan is is mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, is is he?' he?' said said i. i. 'uncle 'uncle dan dan -- -- yonder,' yonder,' answered answered em'ly, em'ly, nodding nodding at at the the boat-house. boat-house. 'yes. 'yes. i i mean mean him. him. he he must must be be very very good, good, i i should should think?' think?' 'good?' 'good?' said said em'ly. em'ly. 'if 'if i i was was ever ever to to be be a a lady, lady, i'd i'd give give him him a a sky-blue sky-blue coat coat with with diamond diamond buttons, buttons, nankeen nankeen trousers, trousers, a a red red velvet velvet waistcoat, waistcoat, a a cocked cocked hat, hat, a a large large gold gold watch, watch, a a silver silver pipe, pipe, and and a a box box of of money.' money.' i i said said i i had had no no doubt doubt that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty well well deserved deserved these these treasures. treasures. i i must must acknowledge acknowledge that that i i felt felt it it difficult difficult to to picture picture him him quite quite at at his his ease ease in in the the raiment raiment proposed proposed for for him him by by his his grateful grateful little little niece, niece, and and that that i i was was particularly particularly doubtful doubtful of of the the policy policy of of the the cocked cocked hat; hat; but but i i kept kept these these sentiments sentiments to to myself. myself. little little em'ly em'ly had had stopped stopped and and looked looked up up at at the the sky sky in in her her enumeration enumeration of of these these articles, articles, as as if if they they were were a a glorious glorious vision. vision. we we went went on on again, again, picking picking up up shells shells and and pebbles. pebbles. 'you would would like like to to be be a a lady?' lady?' i i said. said. emily emily looked looked at at me, me, and and laughed laughed and and nodded nodded 'yes'. 'yes'. 'i 'i should should like like it it very very much. much. we we would would all all be be gentlefolks gentlefolks together, together, then. then. me, me, and and uncle, uncle, and and ham, ham, and and mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. we we wouldn't wouldn't mind mind then, then, when when there there comes comes stormy stormy weather. weather. -- -- -not -not for for our our own own sakes, sakes, i i mean. mean. we we would would for for the the poor poor fishermen's, fishermen's, to to be be sure, sure, and and we'd we'd help help 'em 'em with with money money when when they they come come to to any any hurt.' hurt.' this this seemed seemed to to me me to to be be a a very very satisfactory satisfactory and and therefore therefore not not at at all all improbable improbable picture. picture. i i expressed expressed my my pleasure pleasure in in the the contemplation contemplation of of it, it, and and little little em'ly em'ly was was emboldened emboldened to to say, say, shyly, shyly, 'don't 'don't you think think you are are afraid afraid of of the the sea, sea, now?' now?' it it was was quiet quiet enough enough to to reassure reassure me, me, but but i i have have no no doubt doubt if if i i had had seen seen a a moderately moderately large large wave wave come come tumbling tumbling in, in, i i should should have have taken taken to to my my heels, heels, with with an an awful awful recollection recollection of of her her drowned drowned relations. relations. however, however, i i said said 'no,' 'no,' and and i i added, added, 'you don't don't seem seem to to be be either, either, though though you say say you are,' are,' -- -- for for she she was was walking walking much much too too near near the the brink brink of of a a sort sort of of old old jetty jetty or or wooden wooden causeway causeway we we had had strolled strolled upon, upon, and and i i was was afraid afraid of of her her falling falling over. over. 'i'm 'i'm not not afraid afraid in in this this way,' way,' said said little little em'ly. em'ly. 'but 'but i i wake wake when when it it blows, blows, and and tremble tremble to to think think of of uncle uncle dan dan and and ham ham and and believe believe i i hear hear 'em 'em crying crying out out for for help. help. that's that's why why i i should should like like so so much much to to be be a a lady. lady. but but i'm i'm not not afraid afraid in in this this way. way. not not a a bit. bit. look look here!' here!' she she started started from from my my side, side, and and ran ran along along a a jagged jagged timber timber which which protruded protruded from from the the place place we we stood stood upon, upon, and and overhung overhung the the deep deep water water at at some some height, height, without without the the least least defence. defence. the the incident incident is is so so impressed impressed on on my my remembrance, remembrance, that that if if i i were were a a draughtsman draughtsman i i could could draw draw its its form form here, here, i i dare dare say, say, accurately accurately as as it it was was that that day, day, and and little little em'ly em'ly springing springing forward forward to to her her destruction destruction (as (as it it appeared appeared to to me), me), with with a a look look that that i i have have never never forgotten, forgotten, directed directed far far out out to to sea. sea. the the light, light, bold, bold, fluttering fluttering little little figure figure turned turned and and came came back back safe safe to to me, me, and and i i soon soon laughed laughed at at my my fears, fears, and and at at the the cry cry i i had had uttered; uttered; fruitlessly fruitlessly in in any any case, case, for for there there was was no no one one near. near. but but there there have have been been times times since, since, in in my my manhood, manhood, many many times times there there have have been, been, when when i i have have thought, thought, is is it it possible, possible, among among the the possibilities possibilities of of hidden hidden things, things, that that in in the the sudden sudden rashness rashness of of the the child child and and her her wild wild look look so so far far off, off, there there was was any any merciful merciful attraction attraction of of her her into into danger, danger, any any tempting tempting her her towards towards him him permitted permitted on on the the part part of of her her dead dead father, father, that that her her life life might might have have a a chance chance of of ending ending that that day? day? there there has has been been a a time time since since when when i i have have wondered wondered whether, whether, if if the the life life before before her her could could have have been been revealed revealed to to me me at at a a glance, glance, and and so so revealed revealed as as that that a a child child could could fully fully comprehend comprehend it, it, and and if if her her preservation preservation could could have have depended depended on on a a motion motion of of my my hand, hand, i i ought ought to to have have held held it it up up to to save save her. her. there there has has been been a a time time since since -- -- i i do do not not say say it it lasted lasted long, long, but but it it has has been been -- -- when when i i have have asked asked myself myself the the question, question, would would it it have have been been better better for for little little em'ly em'ly to to have have had had the the waters waters close close above above her her head head that that morning morning in in my my sight; sight; and and when when i i have have answered answered yes, yes, it it would would have have been. been. this this may may be be premature. premature. i i have have set set it it down down too too soon, soon, perhaps. perhaps. but but let let it it stand. stand. we we strolled strolled a a long long way, way, and and loaded loaded ourselves ourselves with with things things that that we we thought thought curious, curious, and and put put some some stranded stranded starfish starfish carefully carefully back back into into the the water water -- -- i i hardly hardly know know enough enough of of the the race race at at this this moment moment to to be be quite quite certain certain whether whether they they had had reason reason to to feel feel obliged obliged to to us us for for doing doing so, so, or or the the reverse reverse -- -- and and then then made made our our way way home home to to mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's dwelling. dwelling. we we stopped stopped under under the the lee lee of of the the lobster-outhouse lobster-outhouse to to exchange exchange an an innocent innocent kiss, kiss, and and went went in in to to breakfast breakfast glowing glowing with with health health and and pleasure. pleasure. 'like 'like two two young young mavishes,' mavishes,' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty said. said. i i knew knew this this meant, meant, in in our our local local dialect, dialect, like like two two young young thrushes, thrushes, and and received received it it as as a a compliment. compliment. of of course course i i was was in in love love with with little little em'ly. em'ly. i i am am sure sure i i loved loved that that baby baby quite quite as as truly, truly, quite quite as as tenderly, tenderly, with with greater greater purity purity and and more more disinterestedness, disinterestedness, than than can can enter enter into into the the best best love love of of a a later later time time of of life, life, high high and and ennobling ennobling as as it it is. is. i i am am sure sure my my fancy fancy raised raised up up something something round round that that blue-eyed blue-eyed mite mite of of a a child, child, which which etherealized, etherealized, and and made made a a very very angel angel of of her. her. if, if, any any sunny sunny forenoon, forenoon, she she had had spread spread a a little little pair pair of of wings wings and and flown flown away away before before my my eyes, eyes, i i don't don't think think i i should should have have regarded regarded it it as as much much more more than than i i had had had had reason reason to to expect. expect. we we used used to to walk walk about about that that dim dim old old flat flat at at yarmouth yarmouth in in a a loving loving manner, manner, hours hours and and hours. hours. the the days days sported sported by by us, us, as as if if time time had had not not grown grown up up himself himself yet, yet, but but were were a a child child too, too, and and always always at at play. play. i i told told em'ly em'ly i i adored adored her, her, and and that that unless unless she she confessed confessed she she adored adored me me i i should should be be reduced reduced to to the the necessity necessity of of killing killing myself myself with with a a sword. sword. she she said said she she did, did, and and i i have have no no doubt doubt she she did. did. as as to to any any sense sense of of inequality, inequality, or or youthfulness, youthfulness, or or other other difficulty difficulty in in our our way, way, little little em'ly em'ly and and i i had had no no such such trouble, trouble, because because we we had had no no future. future. we we made made no no more more provision provision for for growing growing older, older, than than we we did did for for growing growing younger. younger. we we were were the the admiration admiration of of mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge and and peggotty, peggotty, who who used used to to whisper whisper of of an an evening evening when when we we sat, sat, lovingly, lovingly, on on our our little little locker locker side side by by side, side, 'lor! 'lor! wasn't wasn't it it beautiful!' beautiful!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty smiled smiled at at us us from from behind behind his his pipe, pipe, and and ham ham grinned grinned all all the the evening evening and and did did nothing nothing else. else. they they had had something something of of the the sort sort of of pleasure pleasure in in us, us, i i suppose, suppose, that that they they might might have have had had in in a a pretty pretty toy, toy, or or a a pocket pocket model model of of the the colosseum. colosseum. i i soon soon found found out out that that mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge did did not not always always make make herself herself so so agreeable agreeable as as she she might might have have been been expected expected to to do, do, under under the the circumstances circumstances of of her her residence residence with with mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's was was rather rather a a fretful fretful disposition, disposition, and and she she whimpered whimpered more more sometimes sometimes than than was was comfortable comfortable for for other other parties parties in in so so small small an an establishment. establishment. i i was was very very sorry sorry for for her; her; but but there there were were moments moments when when it it would would have have been been more more agreeable, agreeable, i i thought, thought, if if mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge had had had had a a convenient convenient apartment apartment of of her her own own to to retire retire to, to, and and had had stopped stopped there there until until her her spirits spirits revived. revived. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty went went occasionally occasionally to to a a public-house public-house called called the the willing willing mind. mind. i i discovered discovered this, this, by by his his being being out out on on the the second second or or third third evening evening of of our our visit, visit, and and by by mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's looking looking up up at at the the dutch dutch clock, clock, between between eight eight and and nine, nine, and and saying saying he he was was there, there, and and that, that, what what was was more, more, she she had had known known in in the the morning morning he he would would go go there. there. mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge had had been been in in a a low low state state all all day, day, and and had had burst burst into into tears tears in in the the forenoon, forenoon, when when the the fire fire smoked. smoked. 'i 'i am am a a lone lone lorn lorn creetur',' creetur',' were were mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's words, words, when when that that unpleasant unpleasant occurrence occurrence took took place, place, 'and 'and everythink everythink goes goes contrary contrary with with me.' me.' 'oh, 'oh, it'll it'll soon soon leave leave off,' off,' said said peggotty peggotty -- -- i i again again mean mean our our peggotty peggotty -- -- 'and 'and besides, besides, you know, know, it's it's not not more more disagreeable disagreeable to to you than than to to us.' us.' 'i 'i feel feel it it more,' more,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. it it was was a a very very cold cold day, day, with with cutting cutting blasts blasts of of wind. wind. mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's peculiar peculiar corner corner of of the the fireside fireside seemed seemed to to me me to to be be the the warmest warmest and and snuggest snuggest in in the the place, place, as as her her chair chair was was certainly certainly the the easiest, easiest, but but it it didn't didn't suit suit her her that that day day at at all. all. she she was was constantly constantly complaining complaining of of the the cold, cold, and and of of its its occasioning occasioning a a visitation visitation in in her her back back which which she she called called 'the 'the creeps'. creeps'. at at last last she she shed shed tears tears on on that that subject, subject, and and said said again again that that she she was was 'a 'a lone lone lorn lorn creetur' creetur' and and everythink everythink went went contrary contrary with with her'. her'. 'it 'it is is certainly certainly very very cold,' cold,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'everybody 'everybody must must feel feel it it so.' so.' 'i 'i feel feel it it more more than than other other people,' people,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. so so at at dinner; dinner; when when mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was always always helped helped immediately immediately after after me, me, to to whom whom the the preference preference was was given given as as a a visitor visitor of of distinction. distinction. the the fish fish were were small small and and bony, bony, and and the the potatoes potatoes were were a a little little burnt. burnt. we we all all acknowledged acknowledged that that we we felt felt this this something something of of a a disappointment; disappointment; but but mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge said said she she felt felt it it more more than than we we did, did, and and shed shed tears tears again, again, and and made made that that former former declaration declaration with with great great bitterness. bitterness. accordingly, accordingly, when when mr. mr. peggotty peggotty came came home home about about nine nine o'clock, o'clock, this this unfortunate unfortunate mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was knitting knitting in in her her corner, corner, in in a a very very wretched wretched and and miserable miserable condition. condition. peggotty peggotty had had been been working working cheerfully. cheerfully. ham ham had had been been patching patching up up a a great great pair pair of of waterboots; waterboots; and and i, i, with with little little em'ly em'ly by by my my side, side, had had been been reading reading to to them. them. mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge had had never never made made any any other other remark remark than than a a forlorn forlorn sigh, sigh, and and had had never never raised raised her her eyes eyes since since tea. tea. 'well, 'well, mates,' mates,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, taking taking his his seat, seat, 'and 'and how how are are you?' we we all all said said something, something, or or looked looked something, something, to to welcome welcome him, him, except except mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, who who only only shook shook her her head head over over her her knitting. knitting. 'what's 'what's amiss?' amiss?' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a clap clap of of his his hands. hands. 'cheer 'cheer up, up, old old mawther!' mawther!' (mr. (mr. peggotty peggotty meant meant old old girl.) girl.) mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge did did not not appear appear to to be be able able to to cheer cheer up. up. she she took took out out an an old old black black silk silk handkerchief handkerchief and and wiped wiped her her eyes; eyes; but but instead instead of of putting putting it it in in her her pocket, pocket, kept kept it it out, out, and and wiped wiped them them again, again, and and still still kept kept it it out, out, ready ready for for use. use. 'what's 'what's amiss, amiss, dame?' dame?' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'nothing,' 'nothing,' returned returned mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'you've 'you've come come from from the the willing willing mind, mind, dan'l?' dan'l?' 'why 'why yes, yes, i've i've took took a a short short spell spell at at the the willing willing mind mind tonight,' tonight,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i'm 'i'm sorry sorry i i should should drive drive you there,' there,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'drive! 'drive! i i don't don't want want no no driving,' driving,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty peggotty with with an an honest honest laugh. laugh. 'i 'i only only go go too too ready.' ready.' 'very 'very ready,' ready,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, shaking shaking her her head, head, and and wiping wiping her her eyes. eyes. 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, very very ready. ready. i i am am sorry sorry it it should should be be along along of of me me that that you're you're so so ready.' ready.' 'along 'along o' o' you! it it an't an't along along o' o' you!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'don't 'don't ye ye believe believe a a bit bit on on it.' it.' 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, it it is,' is,' cried cried mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'i 'i know know what what i i am. am. i i know know that that i i am am a a lone lone lorn lorn creetur', creetur', and and not not only only that that everythink everythink goes goes contrary contrary with with me, me, but but that that i i go go contrary contrary with with everybody. everybody. yes, yes, yes. yes. i i feel feel more more than than other other people people do, do, and and i i show show it it more. more. it's it's my my misfortun'.' misfortun'.' i i really really couldn't couldn't help help thinking, thinking, as as i i sat sat taking taking in in all all this, this, that that the the misfortune misfortune extended extended to to some some other other members members of of that that family family besides besides mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. but but mr. mr. peggotty peggotty made made no no such such retort, retort, only only answering answering with with another another entreaty entreaty to to mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge to to cheer cheer up. up. 'i 'i an't an't what what i i could could wish wish myself myself to to be,' be,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'i 'i am am far far from from it. it. i i know know what what i i am. am. my my troubles troubles has has made made me me contrary. contrary. i i feel feel my my troubles, troubles, and and they they make make me me contrary. contrary. i i wish wish i i didn't didn't feel feel 'em, 'em, but but i i do. do. i i wish wish i i could could be be hardened hardened to to 'em, 'em, but but i i an't. an't. i i make make the the house house uncomfortable. uncomfortable. i i don't don't wonder wonder at at it. it. i've i've made made your your sister sister so so all all day, day, and and master master davy.' davy.' here here i i was was suddenly suddenly melted, melted, and and roared roared out, out, 'no, 'no, you haven't, haven't, mrs. mrs. gummidge,' gummidge,' in in great great mental mental distress. distress. 'it's 'it's far far from from right right that that i i should should do do it,' it,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'it 'it an't an't a a fit fit return. return. i i had had better better go go into into the the house house and and die. die. i i am am a a lone lone lorn lorn creetur', creetur', and and had had much much better better not not make make myself myself contrary contrary here. here. if if thinks thinks must must go go contrary contrary with with me, me, and and i i must must go go contrary contrary myself, myself, let let me me go go contrary contrary in in my my parish. parish. dan'l, dan'l, i'd i'd better better go go into into the the house, house, and and die die and and be be a a riddance!' riddance!' mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge retired retired with with these these words, words, and and betook betook herself herself to to bed. bed. when when she she was was gone, gone, mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, who who had had not not exhibited exhibited a a trace trace of of any any feeling feeling but but the the profoundest profoundest sympathy, sympathy, looked looked round round upon upon us, us, and and nodding nodding his his head head with with a a lively lively expression expression of of that that sentiment sentiment still still animating animating his his face, face, said said in in a a whisper: whisper: 'she's 'she's been been thinking thinking of of the the old old 'un!' 'un!' i i did did not not quite quite understand understand what what old old one one mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was supposed supposed to to have have fixed fixed her her mind mind upon, upon, until until peggotty, peggotty, on on seeing seeing me me to to bed, bed, explained explained that that it it was was the the late late mr. mr. gummidge; gummidge; and and that that her her brother brother always always took took that that for for a a received received truth truth on on such such occasions, occasions, and and that that it it always always had had a a moving moving effect effect upon upon him. him. some some time time after after he he was was in in his his hammock hammock that that night, night, i i heard heard him him myself myself repeat repeat to to ham, ham, 'poor 'poor thing! thing! she's she's been been thinking thinking of of the the old old 'un!' 'un!' and and whenever whenever mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was overcome overcome in in a a similar similar manner manner during during the the remainder remainder of of our our stay stay (which (which happened happened some some few few times), times), he he always always said said the the same same thing thing in in extenuation extenuation of of the the circumstance, circumstance, and and always always with with the the tenderest tenderest commiseration. commiseration. so so the the fortnight fortnight slipped slipped away, away, varied varied by by nothing nothing but but the the variation variation of of the the tide, tide, which which altered altered mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's times times of of going going out out and and coming coming in, in, and and altered altered ham's ham's engagements engagements also. also. when when the the latter latter was was unemployed, unemployed, he he sometimes sometimes walked walked with with us us to to show show us us the the boats boats and and ships, ships, and and once once or or twice twice he he took took us us for for a a row. row. i i don't don't know know why why one one slight slight set set of of impressions impressions should should be be more more particularly particularly associated associated with with a a place place than than another, another, though though i i believe believe this this obtains obtains with with most most people, people, in in reference reference especially especially to to the the associations associations of of their their childhood. childhood. i i never never hear hear the the name, name, or or read read the the name, name, of of yarmouth, yarmouth, but but i i am am reminded reminded of of a a certain certain sunday sunday morning morning on on the the beach, beach, the the bells bells ringing ringing for for church, church, little little em'ly em'ly leaning leaning on on my my shoulder, shoulder, ham ham lazily lazily dropping dropping stones stones into into the the water, water, and and the the sun, sun, away away at at sea, sea, just just breaking breaking through through the the heavy heavy mist, mist, and and showing showing us us the the ships, ships, like like their their own own shadows. shadows. at at last last the the day day came came for for going going home. home. i i bore bore up up against against the the separation separation from from mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, but but my my agony agony of of mind mind at at leaving leaving little little em'ly em'ly was was piercing. piercing. we we went went arm-in-arm arm-in-arm to to the the public-house public-house where where the the carrier carrier put put up, up, and and i i promised, promised, on on the the road, road, to to write write to to her. her. (i (i redeemed redeemed that that promise promise afterwards, afterwards, in in characters characters larger larger than than those those in in which which apartments apartments are are usually usually announced announced in in manuscript, manuscript, as as being being to to let.) let.) we we were were greatly greatly overcome overcome at at parting; parting; and and if if ever, ever, in in my my life, life, i i have have had had a a void void made made in in my my heart, heart, i i had had one one made made that that day. day. now, now, all all the the time time i i had had been been on on my my visit, visit, i i had had been been ungrateful ungrateful to to my my home home again, again, and and had had thought thought little little or or nothing nothing about about it. it. but but i i was was no no sooner sooner turned turned towards towards it, it, than than my my reproachful reproachful young young conscience conscience seemed seemed to to point point that that way way with with a a ready ready finger; finger; and and i i felt, felt, all all the the more more for for the the sinking sinking of of my my spirits, spirits, that that it it was was my my nest, nest, and and that that my my mother mother was was my my comforter comforter and and friend. friend. this this gained gained upon upon me me as as we we went went along; along; so so that that the the nearer nearer we we drew, drew, the the more more familiar familiar the the objects objects became became that that we we passed, passed, the the more more excited excited i i was was to to get get there, there, and and to to run run into into her her arms. arms. but but peggotty, peggotty, instead instead of of sharing sharing in in those those transports, transports, tried tried to to check check them them (though (though very very kindly), kindly), and and looked looked confused confused and and out out of of sorts. sorts. blunderstone blunderstone rookery rookery would would come, come, however, however, in in spite spite of of her, her, when when the the carrier's carrier's horse horse pleased pleased -- -- and and did. did. how how well well i i recollect recollect it, it, on on a a cold cold grey grey afternoon, afternoon, with with a a dull dull sky, sky, threatening threatening rain! rain! the the door door opened, opened, and and i i looked, looked, half half laughing laughing and and half half crying crying in in my my pleasant pleasant agitation, agitation, for for my my mother. mother. it it was was not not she, she, but but a a strange strange servant. servant. 'why, 'why, peggotty!' peggotty!' i i said, said, ruefully, ruefully, 'isn't 'isn't she she come come home?' home?' 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, master master davy,' davy,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'she's 'she's come come home. home. wait wait a a bit, bit, master master davy, davy, and and i'll i'll -- -- i'll i'll tell tell you something.' something.' between between her her agitation, agitation, and and her her natural natural awkwardness awkwardness in in getting getting out out of of the the cart, cart, peggotty peggotty was was making making a a most most extraordinary extraordinary festoon festoon of of herself, herself, but but i i felt felt too too blank blank and and strange strange to to tell tell her her so. so. when when she she had had got got down, down, she she took took me me by by the the hand; hand; led led me, me, wondering, wondering, into into the the kitchen; kitchen; and and shut shut the the door. door. 'peggotty!' 'peggotty!' said said i, i, quite quite frightened. frightened. 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' 'nothing's 'nothing's the the matter, matter, bless bless you, master master davy davy dear!' dear!' she she answered, answered, assuming assuming an an air air of of sprightliness. sprightliness. 'something's 'something's the the matter, matter, i'm i'm sure. sure. where's where's mama?' mama?' 'where's 'where's mama, mama, master master davy?' davy?' repeated repeated peggotty. peggotty. 'yes. 'yes. why why hasn't hasn't she she come come out out to to the the gate, gate, and and what what have have we we come come in in here here for? for? oh, oh, peggotty!' peggotty!' my my eyes eyes were were full, full, and and i i felt felt as as if if i i were were going going to to tumble tumble down. down. 'bless 'bless the the precious precious boy!' boy!' cried cried peggotty, peggotty, taking taking hold hold of of me. me. 'what 'what is is it? it? speak, speak, my my pet!' pet!' 'not 'not dead, dead, too! too! oh, oh, she's she's not not dead, dead, peggotty?' peggotty?' peggotty peggotty cried cried out out no! no! with with an an astonishing astonishing volume volume of of voice; voice; and and then then sat sat down, down, and and began began to to pant, pant, and and said said i i had had given given her her a a turn. turn. i i gave gave her her a a hug hug to to take take away away the the turn, turn, or or to to give give her her another another turn turn in in the the right right direction, direction, and and then then stood stood before before her, her, looking looking at at her her in in anxious anxious inquiry. inquiry. 'you see, see, dear, dear, i i should should have have told told you before before now,' now,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'but 'but i i hadn't hadn't an an opportunity. opportunity. i i ought ought to to have have made made it, it, perhaps, perhaps, but but i i couldn't couldn't azackly' azackly' -- -- that that was was always always the the substitute substitute for for exactly, exactly, in in peggotty's peggotty's militia militia of of words words -- -- 'bring 'bring my my mind mind to to it.' it.' 'go 'go on, on, peggotty,' peggotty,' said said i, i, more more frightened frightened than than before. before. 'master 'master davy,' davy,' said said peggotty, peggotty, untying untying her her bonnet bonnet with with a a shaking shaking hand, hand, and and speaking speaking in in a a breathless breathless sort sort of of way. way. 'what 'what do do you think? think? you have have got got a a pa!' pa!' i i trembled, trembled, and and turned turned white. white. something something -- -- i i don't don't know know what, what, or or how how -- -- connected connected with with the the grave grave in in the the churchyard, churchyard, and and the the raising raising of of the the dead, dead, seemed seemed to to strike strike me me like like an an unwholesome unwholesome wind. wind. 'a 'a new new one,' one,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'a 'a new new one?' one?' i i repeated. repeated. peggotty peggotty gave gave a a gasp, gasp, as as if if she she were were swallowing swallowing something something that that was was very very hard, hard, and, and, putting putting out out her her hand, hand, said: said: 'come 'come and and see see him.' him.' 'i 'i don't don't want want to to see see him.' him.' -- -- 'and 'and your your mama,' mama,' said said peggotty. peggotty. i i ceased ceased to to draw draw back, back, and and we we went went straight straight to to the the best best parlour, parlour, where where she she left left me. me. on on one one side side of of the the fire, fire, sat sat my my mother; mother; on on the the other, other, mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. my my mother mother dropped dropped her her work, work, and and arose arose hurriedly, hurriedly, but but timidly timidly i i thought. thought. 'now, 'now, clara clara my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'recollect! 'recollect! control control yourself, yourself, always always control control yourself! yourself! davy davy boy, boy, how how do do you do?' do?' i i gave gave him him my my hand. hand. after after a a moment moment of of suspense, suspense, i i went went and and kissed kissed my my mother: mother: she she kissed kissed me, me, patted patted me me gently gently on on the the shoulder, shoulder, and and sat sat down down again again to to her her work. work. i i could could not not look look at at her, her, i i could could not not look look at at him, him, i i knew knew quite quite well well that that he he was was looking looking at at us us both; both; and and i i turned turned to to the the window window and and looked looked out out there, there, at at some some shrubs shrubs that that were were drooping drooping their their heads heads in in the the cold. cold. as as soon soon as as i i could could creep creep away, away, i i crept crept upstairs. upstairs. my my old old dear dear bedroom bedroom was was changed, changed, and and i i was was to to lie lie a a long long way way off. off. i i rambled rambled downstairs downstairs to to find find anything anything that that was was like like itself, itself, so so altered altered it it all all seemed; seemed; and and roamed roamed into into the the yard. yard. i i very very soon soon started started back back from from there, there, for for the the empty empty dog-kennel dog-kennel was was filled filled up up with with a a great great dog dog -- -- deep deep mouthed mouthed and and black-haired black-haired like like him him -- -- and and he he was was very very angry angry at at the the sight sight of of me, me, and and sprang sprang out out to to get get at at me. me. chapter chapter 4. 4. i i fall fall into into disgrace disgrace if if the the room room to to which which my my bed bed was was removed removed were were a a sentient sentient thing thing that that could could give give evidence, evidence, i i might might appeal appeal to to it it at at this this day day -- -- who who sleeps sleeps there there now, now, i i wonder! wonder! -- -- to to bear bear witness witness for for me me what what a a heavy heavy heart heart i i carried carried to to it. it. i i went went up up there, there, hearing hearing the the dog dog in in the the yard yard bark bark after after me me all all the the way way while while i i climbed climbed the the stairs; stairs; and, and, looking looking as as blank blank and and strange strange upon upon the the room room as as the the room room looked looked upon upon me, me, sat sat down down with with my my small small hands hands crossed, crossed, and and thought. thought. i i thought thought of of the the oddest oddest things. things. of of the the shape shape of of the the room, room, of of the the cracks cracks in in the the ceiling, ceiling, of of the the paper paper on on the the walls, walls, of of the the flaws flaws in in the the window-glass window-glass making making ripples ripples and and dimples dimples on on the the prospect, prospect, of of the the washing-stand washing-stand being being rickety rickety on on its its three three legs, legs, and and having having a a discontented discontented something something about about it, it, which which reminded reminded me me of of mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge under under the the influence influence of of the the old old one. one. i i was was crying crying all all the the time, time, but, but, except except that that i i was was conscious conscious of of being being cold cold and and dejected, dejected, i i am am sure sure i i never never thought thought why why i i cried. cried. at at last last in in my my desolation desolation i i began began to to consider consider that that i i was was dreadfully dreadfully in in love love with with little little em'ly, em'ly, and and had had been been torn torn away away from from her her to to come come here here where where no no one one seemed seemed to to want want me, me, or or to to care care about about me, me, half half as as much much as as she she did. did. this this made made such such a a very very miserable miserable piece piece of of business business of of it, it, that that i i rolled rolled myself myself up up in in a a corner corner of of the the counterpane, counterpane, and and cried cried myself myself to to sleep. sleep. i i was was awoke awoke by by somebody somebody saying saying 'here 'here he he is!' is!' and and uncovering uncovering my my hot hot head. head. my my mother mother and and peggotty peggotty had had come come to to look look for for me, me, and and it it was was one one of of them them who who had had done done it. it. 'davy,' 'davy,' said said my my mother. mother. 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' i i thought thought it it was was very very strange strange that that she she should should ask ask me, me, and and answered, answered, 'nothing.' 'nothing.' i i turned turned over over on on my my face, face, i i recollect, recollect, to to hide hide my my trembling trembling lip, lip, which which answered answered her her with with greater greater truth. truth. 'davy,' 'davy,' said said my my mother. mother. 'davy, 'davy, my my child!' child!' i i dare dare say say no no words words she she could could have have uttered uttered would would have have affected affected me me so so much, much, then, then, as as her her calling calling me me her her child. child. i i hid hid my my tears tears in in the the bedclothes, bedclothes, and and pressed pressed her her from from me me with with my my hand, hand, when when she she would would have have raised raised me me up. up. 'this 'this is is your your doing, doing, peggotty, peggotty, you cruel cruel thing!' thing!' said said my my mother. mother. 'i 'i have have no no doubt doubt at at all all about about it. it. how how can can you reconcile reconcile it it to to your your conscience, conscience, i i wonder, wonder, to to prejudice prejudice my my own own boy boy against against me, me, or or against against anybody anybody who who is is dear dear to to me? me? what what do do you mean mean by by it, it, peggotty?' peggotty?' poor poor peggotty peggotty lifted lifted up up her her hands hands and and eyes, eyes, and and only only answered, answered, in in a a sort sort of of paraphrase paraphrase of of the the grace grace i i usually usually repeated repeated after after dinner, dinner, 'lord 'lord forgive forgive you, mrs. mrs. copperfield, copperfield, and and for for what what you have have said said this this minute, minute, may may you never never be be truly truly sorry!' sorry!' 'it's 'it's enough enough to to distract distract me,' me,' cried cried my my mother. mother. 'in 'in my my honeymoon, honeymoon, too, too, when when my my most most inveterate inveterate enemy enemy might might relent, relent, one one would would think, think, and and not not envy envy me me a a little little peace peace of of mind mind and and happiness. happiness. davy, davy, you naughty naughty boy! boy! peggotty, peggotty, you savage savage creature! creature! oh, oh, dear dear me!' me!' cried cried my my mother, mother, turning turning from from one one of of us us to to the the other, other, in in her her pettish pettish wilful wilful manner, manner, 'what 'what a a troublesome troublesome world world this this is, is, when when one one has has the the most most right right to to expect expect it it to to be be as as agreeable agreeable as as possible!' possible!' i i felt felt the the touch touch of of a a hand hand that that i i knew knew was was neither neither hers hers nor nor peggotty's, peggotty's, and and slipped slipped to to my my feet feet at at the the bed-side. bed-side. it it was was mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's hand, hand, and and he he kept kept it it on on my my arm arm as as he he said: said: 'what's 'what's this? this? clara, clara, my my love, love, have have you forgotten? forgotten? -- -- firmness, firmness, my my dear!' dear!' 'i 'i am am very very sorry, sorry, edward,' edward,' said said my my mother. mother. 'i 'i meant meant to to be be very very good, good, but but i i am am so so uncomfortable.' uncomfortable.' 'indeed!' 'indeed!' he he answered. answered. 'that's 'that's a a bad bad hearing, hearing, so so soon, soon, clara.' clara.' 'i 'i say say it's it's very very hard hard i i should should be be made made so so now,' now,' returned returned my my mother, mother, pouting; pouting; 'and 'and it it is is -- -- very very hard hard -- -- isn't isn't it?' it?' he he drew drew her her to to him, him, whispered whispered in in her her ear, ear, and and kissed kissed her. her. i i knew knew as as well, well, when when i i saw saw my my mother's mother's head head lean lean down down upon upon his his shoulder, shoulder, and and her her arm arm touch touch his his neck neck -- -- i i knew knew as as well well that that he he could could mould mould her her pliant pliant nature nature into into any any form form he he chose, chose, as as i i know, know, now, now, that that he he did did it. it. 'go 'go you below, below, my my love,' love,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'david 'david and and i i will will come come down, down, together. together. my my friend,' friend,' turning turning a a darkening darkening face face on on peggotty, peggotty, when when he he had had watched watched my my mother mother out, out, and and dismissed dismissed her her with with a a nod nod and and a a smile; smile; 'do 'do you know know your your mistress's mistress's name?' name?' 'she 'she has has been been my my mistress mistress a a long long time, time, sir,' sir,' answered answered peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i ought ought to to know know it.' it.' 'that's 'that's true,' true,' he he answered. answered. 'but 'but i i thought thought i i heard heard you, as as i i came came upstairs, upstairs, address address her her by by a a name name that that is is not not hers. hers. she she has has taken taken mine, mine, you know. know. will will you remember remember that?' that?' peggotty, peggotty, with with some some uneasy uneasy glances glances at at me, me, curtseyed curtseyed herself herself out out of of the the room room without without replying; replying; seeing, seeing, i i suppose, suppose, that that she she was was expected expected to to go, go, and and had had no no excuse excuse for for remaining. remaining. when when we we two two were were left left alone, alone, he he shut shut the the door, door, and and sitting sitting on on a a chair, chair, and and holding holding me me standing standing before before him, him, looked looked steadily steadily into into my my eyes. eyes. i i felt felt my my own own attracted, attracted, no no less less steadily, steadily, to to his. his. as as i i recall recall our our being being opposed opposed thus, thus, face face to to face, face, i i seem seem again again to to hear hear my my heart heart beat beat fast fast and and high. high. 'david,' 'david,' he he said, said, making making his his lips lips thin, thin, by by pressing pressing them them together, together, 'if 'if i i have have an an obstinate obstinate horse horse or or dog dog to to deal deal with, with, what what do do you think think i i do?' do?' 'i 'i don't don't know.' know.' 'i 'i beat beat him.' him.' i i had had answered answered in in a a kind kind of of breathless breathless whisper, whisper, but but i i felt, felt, in in my my silence, silence, that that my my breath breath was was shorter shorter now. now. 'i 'i make make him him wince, wince, and and smart. smart. i i say say to to myself, myself, "i'll "i'll conquer conquer that that fellow"; fellow"; and and if if it it were were to to cost cost him him all all the the blood blood he he had, had, i i should should do do it. it. what what is is that that upon upon your your face?' face?' 'dirt,' 'dirt,' i i said. said. he he knew knew it it was was the the mark mark of of tears tears as as well well as as i. i. but but if if he he had had asked asked the the question question twenty twenty times, times, each each time time with with twenty twenty blows, blows, i i believe believe my my baby baby heart heart would would have have burst burst before before i i would would have have told told him him so. so. 'you have have a a good good deal deal of of intelligence intelligence for for a a little little fellow,' fellow,' he he said, said, with with a a grave grave smile smile that that belonged belonged to to him, him, 'and 'and you understood understood me me very very well, well, i i see. see. wash wash that that face, face, sir, sir, and and come come down down with with me.' me.' he he pointed pointed to to the the washing-stand, washing-stand, which which i i had had made made out out to to be be like like mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, and and motioned motioned me me with with his his head head to to obey obey him him directly. directly. i i had had little little doubt doubt then, then, and and i i have have less less doubt doubt now, now, that that he he would would have have knocked knocked me me down down without without the the least least compunction, compunction, if if i i had had hesitated. hesitated. 'clara, 'clara, my my dear,' dear,' he he said, said, when when i i had had done done his his bidding, bidding, and and he he walked walked me me into into the the parlour, parlour, with with his his hand hand still still on on my my arm; arm; 'you will will not not be be made made uncomfortable uncomfortable any any more, more, i i hope. hope. we we shall shall soon soon improve improve our our youthful youthful humours.' humours.' god god help help me, me, i i might might have have been been improved improved for for my my whole whole life, life, i i might might have have been been made made another another creature creature perhaps, perhaps, for for life, life, by by a a kind kind word word at at that that season. season. a a word word of of encouragement encouragement and and explanation, explanation, of of pity pity for for my my childish childish ignorance, ignorance, of of welcome welcome home, home, of of reassurance reassurance to to me me that that it it was was home, home, might might have have made made me me dutiful dutiful to to him him in in my my heart heart henceforth, henceforth, instead instead of of in in my my hypocritical hypocritical outside, outside, and and might might have have made made me me respect respect instead instead of of hate hate him. him. i i thought thought my my mother mother was was sorry sorry to to see see me me standing standing in in the the room room so so scared scared and and strange, strange, and and that, that, presently, presently, when when i i stole stole to to a a chair, chair, she she followed followed me me with with her her eyes eyes more more sorrowfully sorrowfully still still -- -- missing, missing, perhaps, perhaps, some some freedom freedom in in my my childish childish tread tread -- -- but but the the word word was was not not spoken, spoken, and and the the time time for for it it was was gone. gone. we we dined dined alone, alone, we we three three together. together. he he seemed seemed to to be be very very fond fond of of my my mother mother -- -- i i am am afraid afraid i i liked liked him him none none the the better better for for that that -- -- and and she she was was very very fond fond of of him. him. i i gathered gathered from from what what they they said, said, that that an an elder elder sister sister of of his his was was coming coming to to stay stay with with them, them, and and that that she she was was expected expected that that evening. evening. i i am am not not certain certain whether whether i i found found out out then, then, or or afterwards, afterwards, that, that, without without being being actively actively concerned concerned in in any any business, business, he he had had some some share share in, in, or or some some annual annual charge charge upon upon the the profits profits of, of, a a wine-merchant's wine-merchant's house house in in london, london, with with which which his his family family had had been been connected connected from from his his great-grandfather's great-grandfather's time, time, and and in in which which his his sister sister had had a a similar similar interest; interest; but but i i may may mention mention it it in in this this place, place, whether whether or or no. no. after after dinner, dinner, when when we we were were sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, and and i i was was meditating meditating an an escape escape to to peggotty peggotty without without having having the the hardihood hardihood to to slip slip away, away, lest lest it it should should offend offend the the master master of of the the house, house, a a coach coach drove drove up up to to the the garden-gate garden-gate and and he he went went out out to to receive receive the the visitor. visitor. my my mother mother followed followed him. him. i i was was timidly timidly following following her, her, when when she she turned turned round round at at the the parlour parlour door, door, in in the the dusk, dusk, and and taking taking me me in in her her embrace embrace as as she she had had been been used used to to do, do, whispered whispered me me to to love love my my new new father father and and be be obedient obedient to to him. him. she she did did this this hurriedly hurriedly and and secretly, secretly, as as if if it it were were wrong, wrong, but but tenderly; tenderly; and, and, putting putting out out her her hand hand behind behind her, her, held held mine mine in in it, it, until until we we came came near near to to where where he he was was standing standing in in the the garden, garden, where where she she let let mine mine go, go, and and drew drew hers hers through through his his arm. arm. it it was was miss miss murdstone murdstone who who was was arrived, arrived, and and a a gloomy-looking gloomy-looking lady lady she she was; was; dark, dark, like like her her brother, brother, whom whom she she greatly greatly resembled resembled in in face face and and voice; voice; and and with with very very heavy heavy eyebrows, eyebrows, nearly nearly meeting meeting over over her her large large nose, nose, as as if, if, being being disabled disabled by by the the wrongs wrongs of of her her sex sex from from wearing wearing whiskers, whiskers, she she had had carried carried them them to to that that account. account. she she brought brought with with her her two two uncompromising uncompromising hard hard black black boxes, boxes, with with her her initials initials on on the the lids lids in in hard hard brass brass nails. nails. when when she she paid paid the the coachman coachman she she took took her her money money out out of of a a hard hard steel steel purse, purse, and and she she kept kept the the purse purse in in a a very very jail jail of of a a bag bag which which hung hung upon upon her her arm arm by by a a heavy heavy chain, chain, and and shut shut up up like like a a bite. bite. i i had had never, never, at at that that time, time, seen seen such such a a metallic metallic lady lady altogether altogether as as miss miss murdstone murdstone was. was. she she was was brought brought into into the the parlour parlour with with many many tokens tokens of of welcome, welcome, and and there there formally formally recognized recognized my my mother mother as as a a new new and and near near relation. relation. then then she she looked looked at at me, me, and and said: said: 'is 'is that that your your boy, boy, sister-in-law?' sister-in-law?' my my mother mother acknowledged acknowledged me. me. 'generally 'generally speaking,' speaking,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'i 'i don't don't like like boys. boys. how how d'ye d'ye do, do, boy?' boy?' under under these these encouraging encouraging circumstances, circumstances, i i replied replied that that i i was was very very well, well, and and that that i i hoped hoped she she was was the the same; same; with with such such an an indifferent indifferent grace, grace, that that miss miss murdstone murdstone disposed disposed of of me me in in two two words: words: 'wants 'wants manner!' manner!' having having uttered uttered which, which, with with great great distinctness, distinctness, she she begged begged the the favour favour of of being being shown shown to to her her room, room, which which became became to to me me from from that that time time forth forth a a place place of of awe awe and and dread, dread, wherein wherein the the two two black black boxes boxes were were never never seen seen open open or or known known to to be be left left unlocked, unlocked, and and where where (for (for i i peeped peeped in in once once or or twice twice when when she she was was out) out) numerous numerous little little steel steel fetters fetters and and rivets, rivets, with with which which miss miss murdstone murdstone embellished embellished herself herself when when she she was was dressed, dressed, generally generally hung hung upon upon the the looking-glass looking-glass in in formidable formidable array. array. as as well well as as i i could could make make out, out, she she had had come come for for good, good, and and had had no no intention intention of of ever ever going going again. again. she she began began to to 'help' 'help' my my mother mother next next morning, morning, and and was was in in and and out out of of the the store-closet store-closet all all day, day, putting putting things things to to rights, rights, and and making making havoc havoc in in the the old old arrangements. arrangements. almost almost the the first first remarkable remarkable thing thing i i observed observed in in miss miss murdstone murdstone was, was, her her being being constantly constantly haunted haunted by by a a suspicion suspicion that that the the servants servants had had a a man man secreted secreted somewhere somewhere on on the the premises. premises. under under the the influence influence of of this this delusion, delusion, she she dived dived into into the the coal-cellar coal-cellar at at the the most most untimely untimely hours, hours, and and scarcely scarcely ever ever opened opened the the door door of of a a dark dark cupboard cupboard without without clapping clapping it it to to again, again, in in the the belief belief that that she she had had got got him. him. though though there there was was nothing nothing very very airy airy about about miss miss murdstone, murdstone, she she was was a a perfect perfect lark lark in in point point of of getting getting up. up. she she was was up up (and, (and, as as i i believe believe to to this this hour, hour, looking looking for for that that man) man) before before anybody anybody in in the the house house was was stirring. stirring. peggotty peggotty gave gave it it as as her her opinion opinion that that she she even even slept slept with with one one eye eye open; open; but but i i could could not not concur concur in in this this idea; idea; for for i i tried tried it it myself myself after after hearing hearing the the suggestion suggestion thrown thrown out, out, and and found found it it couldn't couldn't be be done. done. on on the the very very first first morning morning after after her her arrival arrival she she was was up up and and ringing ringing her her bell bell at at cock-crow. cock-crow. when when my my mother mother came came down down to to breakfast breakfast and and was was going going to to make make the the tea, tea, miss miss murdstone murdstone gave gave her her a a kind kind of of peck peck on on the the cheek, cheek, which which was was her her nearest nearest approach approach to to a a kiss, kiss, and and said: said: 'now, 'now, clara, clara, my my dear, dear, i i am am come come here, here, you know, know, to to relieve relieve you of of all all the the trouble trouble i i can. can. you're you're much much too too pretty pretty and and thoughtless' thoughtless' -- -- my my mother mother blushed blushed but but laughed, laughed, and and seemed seemed not not to to dislike dislike this this character character -- -- 'to 'to have have any any duties duties imposed imposed upon upon you that that can can be be undertaken undertaken by by me. me. if if you'll you'll be be so so good good as as give give me me your your keys, keys, my my dear, dear, i'll i'll attend attend to to all all this this sort sort of of thing thing in in future.' future.' from from that that time, time, miss miss murdstone murdstone kept kept the the keys keys in in her her own own little little jail jail all all day, day, and and under under her her pillow pillow all all night, night, and and my my mother mother had had no no more more to to do do with with them them than than i i had. had. my my mother mother did did not not suffer suffer her her authority authority to to pass pass from from her her without without a a shadow shadow of of protest. protest. one one night night when when miss miss murdstone murdstone had had been been developing developing certain certain household household plans plans to to her her brother, brother, of of which which he he signified signified his his approbation, approbation, my my mother mother suddenly suddenly began began to to cry, cry, and and said said she she thought thought she she might might have have been been consulted. consulted. 'clara!' 'clara!' said said mr. mr. murdstone murdstone sternly. sternly. 'clara! 'clara! i i wonder wonder at at you.' 'oh, 'oh, it's it's very very well well to to say say you wonder, wonder, edward!' edward!' cried cried my my mother, mother, 'and 'and it's it's very very well well for for you to to talk talk about about firmness, firmness, but but you wouldn't wouldn't like like it it yourself.' yourself.' firmness, firmness, i i may may observe, observe, was was the the grand grand quality quality on on which which both both mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone took took their their stand. stand. however however i i might might have have expressed expressed my my comprehension comprehension of of it it at at that that time, time, if if i i had had been been called called upon, upon, i i nevertheless nevertheless did did clearly clearly comprehend comprehend in in my my own own way, way, that that it it was was another another name name for for tyranny; tyranny; and and for for a a certain certain gloomy, gloomy, arrogant, arrogant, devil's devil's humour, humour, that that was was in in them them both. both. the the creed, creed, as as i i should should state state it it now, now, was was this. this. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone was was firm; firm; nobody nobody in in his his world world was was to to be be so so firm firm as as mr. mr. murdstone; murdstone; nobody nobody else else in in his his world world was was to to be be firm firm at at all, all, for for everybody everybody was was to to be be bent bent to to his his firmness. firmness. miss miss murdstone murdstone was was an an exception. exception. she she might might be be firm, firm, but but only only by by relationship, relationship, and and in in an an inferior inferior and and tributary tributary degree. degree. my my mother mother was was another another exception. exception. she she might might be be firm, firm, and and must must be; be; but but only only in in bearing bearing their their firmness, firmness, and and firmly firmly believing believing there there was was no no other other firmness firmness upon upon earth. earth. 'it's 'it's very very hard,' hard,' said said my my mother, mother, 'that 'that in in my my own own house house -- -- ' ' 'my 'my own own house?' house?' repeated repeated mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'clara!' 'clara!' 'our 'our own own house, house, i i mean,' mean,' faltered faltered my my mother, mother, evidently evidently frightened frightened -- -- 'i 'i hope hope you must must know know what what i i mean, mean, edward edward -- -- it's it's very very hard hard that that in in your your own own house house i i may may not not have have a a word word to to say say about about domestic domestic matters. matters. i i am am sure sure i i managed managed very very well well before before we we were were married. married. there's there's evidence,' evidence,' said said my my mother, mother, sobbing; sobbing; 'ask 'ask peggotty peggotty if if i i didn't didn't do do very very well well when when i i wasn't wasn't interfered interfered with!' with!' 'edward,' 'edward,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'let 'let there there be be an an end end of of this. this. i i go go tomorrow.' tomorrow.' 'jane 'jane murdstone,' murdstone,' said said her her brother, brother, 'be 'be silent! silent! how how dare dare you to to insinuate insinuate that that you don't don't know know my my character character better better than than your your words words imply?' imply?' 'i 'i am am sure,' sure,' my my poor poor mother mother went went on, on, at at a a grievous grievous disadvantage, disadvantage, and and with with many many tears, tears, 'i 'i don't don't want want anybody anybody to to go. go. i i should should be be very very miserable miserable and and unhappy unhappy if if anybody anybody was was to to go. go. i i don't don't ask ask much. much. i i am am not not unreasonable. unreasonable. i i only only want want to to be be consulted consulted sometimes. sometimes. i i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to anybody anybody who who assists assists me, me, and and i i only only want want to to be be consulted consulted as as a a mere mere form, form, sometimes. sometimes. i i thought thought you were were pleased, pleased, once, once, with with my my being being a a little little inexperienced inexperienced and and girlish, girlish, edward edward -- -- i i am am sure sure you said said so so -- -- but but you seem seem to to hate hate me me for for it it now, now, you are are so so severe.' severe.' 'edward,' 'edward,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, again, again, 'let 'let there there be be an an end end of of this. this. i i go go tomorrow.' tomorrow.' 'jane 'jane murdstone,' murdstone,' thundered thundered mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'will 'will you be be silent? silent? how how dare dare you?' miss miss murdstone murdstone made made a a jail-delivery jail-delivery of of her her pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and held held it it before before her her eyes. eyes. 'clara,' 'clara,' he he continued, continued, looking looking at at my my mother, mother, 'you surprise surprise me! me! you astound astound me! me! yes, yes, i i had had a a satisfaction satisfaction in in the the thought thought of of marrying marrying an an inexperienced inexperienced and and artless artless person, person, and and forming forming her her character, character, and and infusing infusing into into it it some some amount amount of of that that firmness firmness and and decision decision of of which which it it stood stood in in need. need. but but when when jane jane murdstone murdstone is is kind kind enough enough to to come come to to my my assistance assistance in in this this endeavour, endeavour, and and to to assume, assume, for for my my sake, sake, a a condition condition something something like like a a housekeeper's, housekeeper's, and and when when she she meets meets with with a a base base return return -- -- ' ' 'oh, 'oh, pray, pray, pray, pray, edward,' edward,' cried cried my my mother, mother, 'don't 'don't accuse accuse me me of of being being ungrateful. ungrateful. i i am am sure sure i i am am not not ungrateful. ungrateful. no no one one ever ever said said i i was was before. before. i i have have many many faults, faults, but but not not that. that. oh, oh, don't, don't, my my dear!' dear!' 'when 'when jane jane murdstone murdstone meets, meets, i i say,' say,' he he went went on, on, after after waiting waiting until until my my mother mother was was silent, silent, 'with 'with a a base base return, return, that that feeling feeling of of mine mine is is chilled chilled and and altered.' altered.' 'don't, 'don't, my my love, love, say say that!' that!' implored implored my my mother mother very very piteously. piteously. 'oh, 'oh, don't, don't, edward! edward! i i can't can't bear bear to to hear hear it. it. whatever whatever i i am, am, i i am am affectionate. affectionate. i i know know i i am am affectionate. affectionate. i i wouldn't wouldn't say say it, it, if if i i wasn't wasn't sure sure that that i i am. am. ask ask peggotty. peggotty. i i am am sure sure she'll she'll tell tell you i'm i'm affectionate.' affectionate.' 'there 'there is is no no extent extent of of mere mere weakness, weakness, clara,' clara,' said said mr. mr. murdstone murdstone in in reply, reply, 'that 'that can can have have the the least least weight weight with with me. me. you lose lose breath.' breath.' 'pray 'pray let let us us be be friends,' friends,' said said my my mother, mother, 'i 'i couldn't couldn't live live under under coldness coldness or or unkindness. unkindness. i i am am so so sorry. sorry. i i have have a a great great many many defects, defects, i i know, know, and and it's it's very very good good of of you, edward, edward, with with your your strength strength of of mind, mind, to to endeavour endeavour to to correct correct them them for for me. me. jane, jane, i i don't don't object object to to anything. anything. i i should should be be quite quite broken-hearted broken-hearted if if you thought thought of of leaving leaving -- -- ' ' my my mother mother was was too too much much overcome overcome to to go go on. on. 'jane 'jane murdstone,' murdstone,' said said mr. mr. murdstone murdstone to to his his sister, sister, 'any 'any harsh harsh words words between between us us are, are, i i hope, hope, uncommon. uncommon. it it is is not not my my fault fault that that so so unusual unusual an an occurrence occurrence has has taken taken place place tonight. tonight. i i was was betrayed betrayed into into it it by by another. another. nor nor is is it it your your fault. fault. you were were betrayed betrayed into into it it by by another. another. let let us us both both try try to to forget forget it. it. and and as as this,' this,' he he added, added, after after these these magnanimous magnanimous words, words, 'is 'is not not a a fit fit scene scene for for the the boy boy -- -- david, david, go go to to bed!' bed!' i i could could hardly hardly find find the the door, door, through through the the tears tears that that stood stood in in my my eyes. eyes. i i was was so so sorry sorry for for my my mother's mother's distress; distress; but but i i groped groped my my way way out, out, and and groped groped my my way way up up to to my my room room in in the the dark, dark, without without even even having having the the heart heart to to say say good good night night to to peggotty, peggotty, or or to to get get a a candle candle from from her. her. when when her her coming coming up up to to look look for for me, me, an an hour hour or or so so afterwards, afterwards, awoke awoke me, me, she she said said that that my my mother mother had had gone gone to to bed bed poorly, poorly, and and that that mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone were were sitting sitting alone. alone. going going down down next next morning morning rather rather earlier earlier than than usual, usual, i i paused paused outside outside the the parlour parlour door, door, on on hearing hearing my my mother's mother's voice. voice. she she was was very very earnestly earnestly and and humbly humbly entreating entreating miss miss murdstone's murdstone's pardon, pardon, which which that that lady lady granted, granted, and and a a perfect perfect reconciliation reconciliation took took place. place. i i never never knew knew my my mother mother afterwards afterwards to to give give an an opinion opinion on on any any matter, matter, without without first first appealing appealing to to miss miss murdstone, murdstone, or or without without having having first first ascertained ascertained by by some some sure sure means, means, what what miss miss murdstone's murdstone's opinion opinion was; was; and and i i never never saw saw miss miss murdstone, murdstone, when when out out of of temper temper (she (she was was infirm infirm that that way), way), move move her her hand hand towards towards her her bag bag as as if if she she were were going going to to take take out out the the keys keys and and offer offer to to resign resign them them to to my my mother, mother, without without seeing seeing that that my my mother mother was was in in a a terrible terrible fright. fright. the the gloomy gloomy taint taint that that was was in in the the murdstone murdstone blood, blood, darkened darkened the the murdstone murdstone religion, religion, which which was was austere austere and and wrathful. wrathful. i i have have thought, thought, since, since, that that its its assuming assuming that that character character was was a a necessary necessary consequence consequence of of mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's firmness, firmness, which which wouldn't wouldn't allow allow him him to to let let anybody anybody off off from from the the utmost utmost weight weight of of the the severest severest penalties penalties he he could could find find any any excuse excuse for. for. be be this this as as it it may, may, i i well well remember remember the the tremendous tremendous visages visages with with which which we we used used to to go go to to church, church, and and the the changed changed air air of of the the place. place. again, again, the the dreaded dreaded sunday sunday comes comes round, round, and and i i file file into into the the old old pew pew first, first, like like a a guarded guarded captive captive brought brought to to a a condemned condemned service. service. again, again, miss miss murdstone, murdstone, in in a a black black velvet velvet gown, gown, that that looks looks as as if if it it had had been been made made out out of of a a pall, pall, follows follows close close upon upon me; me; then then my my mother; mother; then then her her husband. husband. there there is is no no peggotty peggotty now, now, as as in in the the old old time. time. again, again, i i listen listen to to miss miss murdstone murdstone mumbling mumbling the the responses, responses, and and emphasizing emphasizing all all the the dread dread words words with with a a cruel cruel relish. relish. again, again, i i see see her her dark dark eyes eyes roll roll round round the the church church when when she she says says 'miserable 'miserable sinners', sinners', as as if if she she were were calling calling all all the the congregation congregation names. names. again, again, i i catch catch rare rare glimpses glimpses of of my my mother, mother, moving moving her her lips lips timidly timidly between between the the two, two, with with one one of of them them muttering muttering at at each each ear ear like like low low thunder. thunder. again, again, i i wonder wonder with with a a sudden sudden fear fear whether whether it it is is likely likely that that our our good good old old clergyman clergyman can can be be wrong, wrong, and and mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone right, right, and and that that all all the the angels angels in in heaven heaven can can be be destroying destroying angels. angels. again, again, if if i i move move a a finger finger or or relax relax a a muscle muscle of of my my face, face, miss miss murdstone murdstone pokes pokes me me with with her her prayer-book, prayer-book, and and makes makes my my side side ache. ache. yes, yes, and and again, again, as as we we walk walk home, home, i i note note some some neighbours neighbours looking looking at at my my mother mother and and at at me, me, and and whispering. whispering. again, again, as as the the three three go go on on arm-in-arm, arm-in-arm, and and i i linger linger behind behind alone, alone, i i follow follow some some of of those those looks, looks, and and wonder wonder if if my my mother's mother's step step be be really really not not so so light light as as i i have have seen seen it, it, and and if if the the gaiety gaiety of of her her beauty beauty be be really really almost almost worried worried away. away. again, again, i i wonder wonder whether whether any any of of the the neighbours neighbours call call to to mind, mind, as as i i do, do, how how we we used used to to walk walk home home together, together, she she and and i; i; and and i i wonder wonder stupidly stupidly about about that, that, all all the the dreary dreary dismal dismal day. day. there there had had been been some some talk talk on on occasions occasions of of my my going going to to boarding-school. boarding-school. mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone had had originated originated it, it, and and my my mother mother had had of of course course agreed agreed with with them. them. nothing, nothing, however, however, was was concluded concluded on on the the subject subject yet. yet. in in the the meantime, meantime, i i learnt learnt lessons lessons at at home. home. shall shall i i ever ever forget forget those those lessons! lessons! they they were were presided presided over over nominally nominally by by my my mother, mother, but but really really by by mr. mr. murdstone murdstone and and his his sister, sister, who who were were always always present, present, and and found found them them a a favourable favourable occasion occasion for for giving giving my my mother mother lessons lessons in in that that miscalled miscalled firmness, firmness, which which was was the the bane bane of of both both our our lives. lives. i i believe believe i i was was kept kept at at home home for for that that purpose. purpose. i i had had been been apt apt enough enough to to learn, learn, and and willing willing enough, enough, when when my my mother mother and and i i had had lived lived alone alone together. together. i i can can faintly faintly remember remember learning learning the the alphabet alphabet at at her her knee. knee. to to this this day, day, when when i i look look upon upon the the fat fat black black letters letters in in the the primer, primer, the the puzzling puzzling novelty novelty of of their their shapes, shapes, and and the the easy easy good-nature good-nature of of o o and and q q and and s, s, seem seem to to present present themselves themselves again again before before me me as as they they used used to to do. do. but but they they recall recall no no feeling feeling of of disgust disgust or or reluctance. reluctance. on on the the contrary, contrary, i i seem seem to to have have walked walked along along a a path path of of flowers flowers as as far far as as the the crocodile-book, crocodile-book, and and to to have have been been cheered cheered by by the the gentleness gentleness of of my my mother's mother's voice voice and and manner manner all all the the way. way. but but these these solemn solemn lessons lessons which which succeeded succeeded those, those, i i remember remember as as the the death-blow death-blow of of my my peace, peace, and and a a grievous grievous daily daily drudgery drudgery and and misery. misery. they they were were very very long, long, very very numerous, numerous, very very hard hard -- -- perfectly perfectly unintelligible, unintelligible, some some of of them, them, to to me me -- -- and and i i was was generally generally as as much much bewildered bewildered by by them them as as i i believe believe my my poor poor mother mother was was herself. herself. let let me me remember remember how how it it used used to to be, be, and and bring bring one one morning morning back back again. again. i i come come into into the the second-best second-best parlour parlour after after breakfast, breakfast, with with my my books, books, and and an an exercise-book, exercise-book, and and a a slate. slate. my my mother mother is is ready ready for for me me at at her her writing-desk, writing-desk, but but not not half half so so ready ready as as mr. mr. murdstone murdstone in in his his easy-chair easy-chair by by the the window window (though (though he he pretends pretends to to be be reading reading a a book), book), or or as as miss miss murdstone, murdstone, sitting sitting near near my my mother mother stringing stringing steel steel beads. beads. the the very very sight sight of of these these two two has has such such an an influence influence over over me, me, that that i i begin begin to to feel feel the the words words i i have have been been at at infinite infinite pains pains to to get get into into my my head, head, all all sliding sliding away, away, and and going going i i don't don't know know where. where. i i wonder wonder where where they they do do go, go, by by the the by? by? i i hand hand the the first first book book to to my my mother. mother. perhaps perhaps it it is is a a grammar, grammar, perhaps perhaps a a history, history, or or geography. geography. i i take take a a last last drowning drowning look look at at the the page page as as i i give give it it into into her her hand, hand, and and start start off off aloud aloud at at a a racing racing pace pace while while i i have have got got it it fresh. fresh. i i trip trip over over a a word. word. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone looks looks up. up. i i trip trip over over another another word. word. miss miss murdstone murdstone looks looks up. up. i i redden, redden, tumble tumble over over half-a-dozen half-a-dozen words, words, and and stop. stop. i i think think my my mother mother would would show show me me the the book book if if she she dared, dared, but but she she does does not not dare, dare, and and she she says says softly: softly: 'oh, 'oh, davy, davy, davy!' davy!' 'now, 'now, clara,' clara,' says says mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'be 'be firm firm with with the the boy. boy. don't don't say, say, "oh, "oh, davy, davy, davy!" davy!" that's that's childish. childish. he he knows knows his his lesson, lesson, or or he he does does not not know know it.' it.' 'he 'he does does not not know know it,' it,' miss miss murdstone murdstone interposes interposes awfully. awfully. 'i 'i am am really really afraid afraid he he does does not,' not,' says says my my mother. mother. 'then, 'then, you see, see, clara,' clara,' returns returns miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'you should should just just give give him him the the book book back, back, and and make make him him know know it.' it.' 'yes, 'yes, certainly,' certainly,' says says my my mother; mother; 'that 'that is is what what i i intend intend to to do, do, my my dear dear jane. jane. now, now, davy, davy, try try once once more, more, and and don't don't be be stupid.' stupid.' i i obey obey the the first first clause clause of of the the injunction injunction by by trying trying once once more, more, but but am am not not so so successful successful with with the the second, second, for for i i am am very very stupid. stupid. i i tumble tumble down down before before i i get get to to the the old old place, place, at at a a point point where where i i was was all all right right before, before, and and stop stop to to think. think. but but i i can't can't think think about about the the lesson. lesson. i i think think of of the the number number of of yards yards of of net net in in miss miss murdstone's murdstone's cap, cap, or or of of the the price price of of mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's dressing-gown, dressing-gown, or or any any such such ridiculous ridiculous problem problem that that i i have have no no business business with, with, and and don't don't want want to to have have anything anything at at all all to to do do with. with. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone makes makes a a movement movement of of impatience impatience which which i i have have been been expecting expecting for for a a long long time. time. miss miss murdstone murdstone does does the the same. same. my my mother mother glances glances submissively submissively at at them, them, shuts shuts the the book, book, and and lays lays it it by by as as an an arrear arrear to to be be worked worked out out when when my my other other tasks tasks are are done. done. there there is is a a pile pile of of these these arrears arrears very very soon, soon, and and it it swells swells like like a a rolling rolling snowball. snowball. the the bigger bigger it it gets, gets, the the more more stupid stupid i i get. get. the the case case is is so so hopeless, hopeless, and and i i feel feel that that i i am am wallowing wallowing in in such such a a bog bog of of nonsense, nonsense, that that i i give give up up all all idea idea of of getting getting out, out, and and abandon abandon myself myself to to my my fate. fate. the the despairing despairing way way in in which which my my mother mother and and i i look look at at each each other, other, as as i i blunder blunder on, on, is is truly truly melancholy. melancholy. but but the the greatest greatest effect effect in in these these miserable miserable lessons lessons is is when when my my mother mother (thinking (thinking nobody nobody is is observing observing her) her) tries tries to to give give me me the the cue cue by by the the motion motion of of her her lips. lips. at at that that instant, instant, miss miss murdstone, murdstone, who who has has been been lying lying in in wait wait for for nothing nothing else else all all along, along, says says in in a a deep deep warning warning voice: voice: 'clara!' 'clara!' my my mother mother starts, starts, colours, colours, and and smiles smiles faintly. faintly. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone comes comes out out of of his his chair, chair, takes takes the the book, book, throws throws it it at at me me or or boxes boxes my my ears ears with with it, it, and and turns turns me me out out of of the the room room by by the the shoulders. shoulders. even even when when the the lessons lessons are are done, done, the the worst worst is is yet yet to to happen, happen, in in the the shape shape of of an an appalling appalling sum. sum. this this is is invented invented for for me, me, and and delivered delivered to to me me orally orally by by mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, and and begins, begins, 'if 'if i i go go into into a a cheesemonger's cheesemonger's shop, shop, and and buy buy five five thousand thousand double-gloucester double-gloucester cheeses cheeses at at fourpence-halfpenny fourpence-halfpenny each, each, present present payment' payment' -- -- at at which which i i see see miss miss murdstone murdstone secretly secretly overjoyed. overjoyed. i i pore pore over over these these cheeses cheeses without without any any result result or or enlightenment enlightenment until until dinner-time, dinner-time, when, when, having having made made a a mulatto mulatto of of myself myself by by getting getting the the dirt dirt of of the the slate slate into into the the pores pores of of my my skin, skin, i i have have a a slice slice of of bread bread to to help help me me out out with with the the cheeses, cheeses, and and am am considered considered in in disgrace disgrace for for the the rest rest of of the the evening. evening. it it seems seems to to me, me, at at this this distance distance of of time, time, as as if if my my unfortunate unfortunate studies studies generally generally took took this this course. course. i i could could have have done done very very well well if if i i had had been been without without the the murdstones; murdstones; but but the the influence influence of of the the murdstones murdstones upon upon me me was was like like the the fascination fascination of of two two snakes snakes on on a a wretched wretched young young bird. bird. even even when when i i did did get get through through the the morning morning with with tolerable tolerable credit, credit, there there was was not not much much gained gained but but dinner; dinner; for for miss miss murdstone murdstone never never could could endure endure to to see see me me untasked, untasked, and and if if i i rashly rashly made made any any show show of of being being unemployed, unemployed, called called her her brother's brother's attention attention to to me me by by saying, saying, 'clara, 'clara, my my dear, dear, there's there's nothing nothing like like work work -- -- give give your your boy boy an an exercise'; exercise'; which which caused caused me me to to be be clapped clapped down down to to some some new new labour, labour, there there and and then. then. as as to to any any recreation recreation with with other other children children of of my my age, age, i i had had very very little little of of that; that; for for the the gloomy gloomy theology theology of of the the murdstones murdstones made made all all children children out out to to be be a a swarm swarm of of little little vipers vipers (though (though there there was was a a child child once once set set in in the the midst midst of of the the disciples), disciples), and and held held that that they they contaminated contaminated one one another. another. the the natural natural result result of of this this treatment, treatment, continued, continued, i i suppose, suppose, for for some some six six months months or or more, more, was was to to make make me me sullen, sullen, dull, dull, and and dogged. dogged. i i was was not not made made the the less less so so by by my my sense sense of of being being daily daily more more and and more more shut shut out out and and alienated alienated from from my my mother. mother. i i believe believe i i should should have have been been almost almost stupefied stupefied but but for for one one circumstance. circumstance. it it was was this. this. my my father father had had left left a a small small collection collection of of books books in in a a little little room room upstairs, upstairs, to to which which i i had had access access (for (for it it adjoined adjoined my my own) own) and and which which nobody nobody else else in in our our house house ever ever troubled. troubled. from from that that blessed blessed little little room, room, roderick roderick random, random, peregrine peregrine pickle, pickle, humphrey humphrey clinker, clinker, tom tom jones, jones, the the vicar vicar of of wakefield, wakefield, don don quixote, quixote, gil gil blas, blas, and and robinson robinson crusoe, crusoe, came came out, out, a a glorious glorious host, host, to to keep keep me me company. company. they they kept kept alive alive my my fancy, fancy, and and my my hope hope of of something something beyond beyond that that place place and and time, time, -- -- they, they, and and the the arabian arabian nights, nights, and and the the tales tales of of the the genii, genii, -- -- and and did did me me no no harm; harm; for for whatever whatever harm harm was was in in some some of of them them was was not not there there for for me; me; i i knew knew nothing nothing of of it. it. it it is is astonishing astonishing to to me me now, now, how how i i found found time, time, in in the the midst midst of of my my porings porings and and blunderings blunderings over over heavier heavier themes, themes, to to read read those those books books as as i i did. did. it it is is curious curious to to me me how how i i could could ever ever have have consoled consoled myself myself under under my my small small troubles troubles (which (which were were great great troubles troubles to to me), me), by by impersonating impersonating my my favourite favourite characters characters in in them them -- -- as as i i did did -- -- and and by by putting putting mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone into into all all the the bad bad ones ones -- -- which which i i did did too. too. i i have have been been tom tom jones jones (a (a child's child's tom tom jones, jones, a a harmless harmless creature) creature) for for a a week week together. together. i i have have sustained sustained my my own own idea idea of of roderick roderick random random for for a a month month at at a a stretch, stretch, i i verily verily believe. believe. i i had had a a greedy greedy relish relish for for a a few few volumes volumes of of voyages voyages and and travels travels -- -- i i forget forget what, what, now now -- -- that that were were on on those those shelves; shelves; and and for for days days and and days days i i can can remember remember to to have have gone gone about about my my region region of of our our house, house, armed armed with with the the centre-piece centre-piece out out of of an an old old set set of of boot-trees boot-trees -- -- the the perfect perfect realization realization of of captain captain somebody, somebody, of of the the royal royal british british navy, navy, in in danger danger of of being being beset beset by by savages, savages, and and resolved resolved to to sell sell his his life life at at a a great great price. price. the the captain captain never never lost lost dignity, dignity, from from having having his his ears ears boxed boxed with with the the latin latin grammar. grammar. i i did; did; but but the the captain captain was was a a captain captain and and a a hero, hero, in in despite despite of of all all the the grammars grammars of of all all the the languages languages in in the the world, world, dead dead or or alive. alive. this this was was my my only only and and my my constant constant comfort. comfort. when when i i think think of of it, it, the the picture picture always always rises rises in in my my mind, mind, of of a a summer summer evening, evening, the the boys boys at at play play in in the the churchyard, churchyard, and and i i sitting sitting on on my my bed, bed, reading reading as as if if for for life. life. every every barn barn in in the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, every every stone stone in in the the church, church, and and every every foot foot of of the the churchyard, churchyard, had had some some association association of of its its own, own, in in my my mind, mind, connected connected with with these these books, books, and and stood stood for for some some locality locality made made famous famous in in them. them. i i have have seen seen tom tom pipes pipes go go climbing climbing up up the the church-steeple; church-steeple; i i have have watched watched strap, strap, with with the the knapsack knapsack on on his his back, back, stopping stopping to to rest rest himself himself upon upon the the wicket-gate; wicket-gate; and and i i know know that that commodore commodore trunnion trunnion held held that that club club with with mr. mr. pickle, pickle, in in the the parlour parlour of of our our little little village village alehouse. alehouse. the the reader reader now now understands, understands, as as well well as as i i do, do, what what i i was was when when i i came came to to that that point point of of my my youthful youthful history history to to which which i i am am now now coming coming again. again. one one morning morning when when i i went went into into the the parlour parlour with with my my books, books, i i found found my my mother mother looking looking anxious, anxious, miss miss murdstone murdstone looking looking firm, firm, and and mr. mr. murdstone murdstone binding binding something something round round the the bottom bottom of of a a cane cane -- -- a a lithe lithe and and limber limber cane, cane, which which he he left left off off binding binding when when i i came came in, in, and and poised poised and and switched switched in in the the air. air. 'i 'i tell tell you, clara,' clara,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'i 'i have have been been often often flogged flogged myself.' myself.' 'to 'to be be sure; sure; of of course,' course,' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'certainly, 'certainly, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' faltered faltered my my mother, mother, meekly. meekly. 'but 'but -- -- but but do do you think think it it did did edward edward good?' good?' 'do 'do you think think it it did did edward edward harm, harm, clara?' clara?' asked asked mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, gravely. gravely. 'that's 'that's the the point,' point,' said said his his sister. sister. to to this this my my mother mother returned, returned, 'certainly, 'certainly, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' and and said said no no more. more. i i felt felt apprehensive apprehensive that that i i was was personally personally interested interested in in this this dialogue, dialogue, and and sought sought mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's eye eye as as it it lighted lighted on on mine. mine. 'now, 'now, david,' david,' he he said said -- -- and and i i saw saw that that cast cast again again as as he he said said it it -- -- 'you must must be be far far more more careful careful today today than than usual.' usual.' he he gave gave the the cane cane another another poise, poise, and and another another switch; switch; and and having having finished finished his his preparation preparation of of it, it, laid laid it it down down beside beside him, him, with with an an impressive impressive look, look, and and took took up up his his book. book. this this was was a a good good freshener freshener to to my my presence presence of of mind, mind, as as a a beginning. beginning. i i felt felt the the words words of of my my lessons lessons slipping slipping off, off, not not one one by by one, one, or or line line by by line, line, but but by by the the entire entire page; page; i i tried tried to to lay lay hold hold of of them; them; but but they they seemed, seemed, if if i i may may so so express express it, it, to to have have put put skates skates on, on, and and to to skim skim away away from from me me with with a a smoothness smoothness there there was was no no checking. checking. we we began began badly, badly, and and went went on on worse. worse. i i had had come come in in with with an an idea idea of of distinguishing distinguishing myself myself rather, rather, conceiving conceiving that that i i was was very very well well prepared; prepared; but but it it turned turned out out to to be be quite quite a a mistake. mistake. book book after after book book was was added added to to the the heap heap of of failures, failures, miss miss murdstone murdstone being being firmly firmly watchful watchful of of us us all all the the time. time. and and when when we we came came at at last last to to the the five five thousand thousand cheeses cheeses (canes (canes he he made made it it that that day, day, i i remember), remember), my my mother mother burst burst out out crying. crying. 'clara!' 'clara!' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, in in her her warning warning voice. voice. 'i 'i am am not not quite quite well, well, my my dear dear jane, jane, i i think,' think,' said said my my mother. mother. i i saw saw him him wink, wink, solemnly, solemnly, at at his his sister, sister, as as he he rose rose and and said, said, taking taking up up the the cane: cane: 'why, 'why, jane, jane, we we can can hardly hardly expect expect clara clara to to bear, bear, with with perfect perfect firmness, firmness, the the worry worry and and torment torment that that david david has has occasioned occasioned her her today. today. that that would would be be stoical. stoical. clara clara is is greatly greatly strengthened strengthened and and improved, improved, but but we we can can hardly hardly expect expect so so much much from from her. her. david, david, you and and i i will will go go upstairs, upstairs, boy.' boy.' as as he he took took me me out out at at the the door, door, my my mother mother ran ran towards towards us. us. miss miss murdstone murdstone said, said, 'clara! 'clara! are are you a a perfect perfect fool?' fool?' and and interfered. interfered. i i saw saw my my mother mother stop stop her her ears ears then, then, and and i i heard heard her her crying. crying. he he walked walked me me up up to to my my room room slowly slowly and and gravely gravely -- -- i i am am certain certain he he had had a a delight delight in in that that formal formal parade parade of of executing executing justice justice -- -- and and when when we we got got there, there, suddenly suddenly twisted twisted my my head head under under his his arm. arm. 'mr. 'mr. murdstone! murdstone! sir!' sir!' i i cried cried to to him. him. 'don't! 'don't! pray pray don't don't beat beat me! me! i i have have tried tried to to learn, learn, sir, sir, but but i i can't can't learn learn while while you and and miss miss murdstone murdstone are are by. by. i i can't can't indeed!' indeed!' 'can't 'can't you, indeed, indeed, david?' david?' he he said. said. 'we'll 'we'll try try that.' that.' he he had had my my head head as as in in a a vice, vice, but but i i twined twined round round him him somehow, somehow, and and stopped stopped him him for for a a moment, moment, entreating entreating him him not not to to beat beat me. me. it it was was only only a a moment moment that that i i stopped stopped him, him, for for he he cut cut me me heavily heavily an an instant instant afterwards, afterwards, and and in in the the same same instant instant i i caught caught the the hand hand with with which which he he held held me me in in my my mouth, mouth, between between my my teeth, teeth, and and bit bit it it through. through. it it sets sets my my teeth teeth on on edge edge to to think think of of it. it. he he beat beat me me then, then, as as if if he he would would have have beaten beaten me me to to death. death. above above all all the the noise noise we we made, made, i i heard heard them them running running up up the the stairs, stairs, and and crying crying out out -- -- i i heard heard my my mother mother crying crying out out -- -- and and peggotty. peggotty. then then he he was was gone; gone; and and the the door door was was locked locked outside; outside; and and i i was was lying, lying, fevered fevered and and hot, hot, and and torn, torn, and and sore, sore, and and raging raging in in my my puny puny way, way, upon upon the the floor. floor. how how well well i i recollect, recollect, when when i i became became quiet, quiet, what what an an unnatural unnatural stillness stillness seemed seemed to to reign reign through through the the whole whole house! house! how how well well i i remember, remember, when when my my smart smart and and passion passion began began to to cool, cool, how how wicked wicked i i began began to to feel! feel! i i sat sat listening listening for for a a long long while, while, but but there there was was not not a a sound. sound. i i crawled crawled up up from from the the floor, floor, and and saw saw my my face face in in the the glass, glass, so so swollen, swollen, red, red, and and ugly ugly that that it it almost almost frightened frightened me. me. my my stripes stripes were were sore sore and and stiff, stiff, and and made made me me cry cry afresh, afresh, when when i i moved; moved; but but they they were were nothing nothing to to the the guilt guilt i i felt. felt. it it lay lay heavier heavier on on my my breast breast than than if if i i had had been been a a most most atrocious atrocious criminal, criminal, i i dare dare say. say. it it had had begun begun to to grow grow dark, dark, and and i i had had shut shut the the window window (i (i had had been been lying, lying, for for the the most most part, part, with with my my head head upon upon the the sill, sill, by by turns turns crying, crying, dozing, dozing, and and looking looking listlessly listlessly out), out), when when the the key key was was turned, turned, and and miss miss murdstone murdstone came came in in with with some some bread bread and and meat, meat, and and milk. milk. these these she she put put down down upon upon the the table table without without a a word, word, glaring glaring at at me me the the while while with with exemplary exemplary firmness, firmness, and and then then retired, retired, locking locking the the door door after after her. her. long long after after it it was was dark dark i i sat sat there, there, wondering wondering whether whether anybody anybody else else would would come. come. when when this this appeared appeared improbable improbable for for that that night, night, i i undressed, undressed, and and went went to to bed; bed; and, and, there, there, i i began began to to wonder wonder fearfully fearfully what what would would be be done done to to me. me. whether whether it it was was a a criminal criminal act act that that i i had had committed? committed? whether whether i i should should be be taken taken into into custody, custody, and and sent sent to to prison? prison? whether whether i i was was at at all all in in danger danger of of being being hanged? hanged? i i never never shall shall forget forget the the waking, waking, next next morning; morning; the the being being cheerful cheerful and and fresh fresh for for the the first first moment, moment, and and then then the the being being weighed weighed down down by by the the stale stale and and dismal dismal oppression oppression of of remembrance. remembrance. miss miss murdstone murdstone reappeared reappeared before before i i was was out out of of bed; bed; told told me, me, in in so so many many words, words, that that i i was was free free to to walk walk in in the the garden garden for for half half an an hour hour and and no no longer; longer; and and retired, retired, leaving leaving the the door door open, open, that that i i might might avail avail myself myself of of that that permission. permission. i i did did so, so, and and did did so so every every morning morning of of my my imprisonment, imprisonment, which which lasted lasted five five days. days. if if i i could could have have seen seen my my mother mother alone, alone, i i should should have have gone gone down down on on my my knees knees to to her her and and besought besought her her forgiveness; forgiveness; but but i i saw saw no no one, one, miss miss murdstone murdstone excepted, excepted, during during the the whole whole time time -- -- except except at at evening evening prayers prayers in in the the parlour; parlour; to to which which i i was was escorted escorted by by miss miss murdstone murdstone after after everybody everybody else else was was placed; placed; where where i i was was stationed, stationed, a a young young outlaw, outlaw, all all alone alone by by myself myself near near the the door; door; and and whence whence i i was was solemnly solemnly conducted conducted by by my my jailer, jailer, before before any any one one arose arose from from the the devotional devotional posture. posture. i i only only observed observed that that my my mother mother was was as as far far off off from from me me as as she she could could be, be, and and kept kept her her face face another another way way so so that that i i never never saw saw it; it; and and that that mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's hand hand was was bound bound up up in in a a large large linen linen wrapper. wrapper. the the length length of of those those five five days days i i can can convey convey no no idea idea of of to to any any one. one. they they occupy occupy the the place place of of years years in in my my remembrance. remembrance. the the way way in in which which i i listened listened to to all all the the incidents incidents of of the the house house that that made made themselves themselves audible audible to to me; me; the the ringing ringing of of bells, bells, the the opening opening and and shutting shutting of of doors, doors, the the murmuring murmuring of of voices, voices, the the footsteps footsteps on on the the stairs; stairs; to to any any laughing, laughing, whistling, whistling, or or singing, singing, outside, outside, which which seemed seemed more more dismal dismal than than anything anything else else to to me me in in my my solitude solitude and and disgrace disgrace -- -- the the uncertain uncertain pace pace of of the the hours, hours, especially especially at at night, night, when when i i would would wake wake thinking thinking it it was was morning, morning, and and find find that that the the family family were were not not yet yet gone gone to to bed, bed, and and that that all all the the length length of of night night had had yet yet to to come come -- -- the the depressed depressed dreams dreams and and nightmares nightmares i i had had -- -- the the return return of of day, day, noon, noon, afternoon, afternoon, evening, evening, when when the the boys boys played played in in the the churchyard, churchyard, and and i i watched watched them them from from a a distance distance within within the the room, room, being being ashamed ashamed to to show show myself myself at at the the window window lest lest they they should should know know i i was was a a prisoner prisoner -- -- the the strange strange sensation sensation of of never never hearing hearing myself myself speak speak -- -- the the fleeting fleeting intervals intervals of of something something like like cheerfulness, cheerfulness, which which came came with with eating eating and and drinking, drinking, and and went went away away with with it it -- -- the the setting setting in in of of rain rain one one evening, evening, with with a a fresh fresh smell, smell, and and its its coming coming down down faster faster and and faster faster between between me me and and the the church, church, until until it it and and gathering gathering night night seemed seemed to to quench quench me me in in gloom, gloom, and and fear, fear, and and remorse remorse -- -- all all this this appears appears to to have have gone gone round round and and round round for for years years instead instead of of days, days, it it is is so so vividly vividly and and strongly strongly stamped stamped on on my my remembrance. remembrance. on on the the last last night night of of my my restraint, restraint, i i was was awakened awakened by by hearing hearing my my own own name name spoken spoken in in a a whisper. whisper. i i started started up up in in bed, bed, and and putting putting out out my my arms arms in in the the dark, dark, said: said: 'is 'is that that you, peggotty?' peggotty?' there there was was no no immediate immediate answer, answer, but but presently presently i i heard heard my my name name again, again, in in a a tone tone so so very very mysterious mysterious and and awful, awful, that that i i think think i i should should have have gone gone into into a a fit, fit, if if it it had had not not occurred occurred to to me me that that it it must must have have come come through through the the keyhole. keyhole. i i groped groped my my way way to to the the door, door, and and putting putting my my own own lips lips to to the the keyhole, keyhole, whispered: whispered: 'is 'is that that you, peggotty peggotty dear?' dear?' 'yes, 'yes, my my own own precious precious davy,' davy,' she she replied. replied. 'be 'be as as soft soft as as a a mouse, mouse, or or the the cat'll cat'll hear hear us.' us.' i i understood understood this this to to mean mean miss miss murdstone, murdstone, and and was was sensible sensible of of the the urgency urgency of of the the case; case; her her room room being being close close by. by. 'how's 'how's mama, mama, dear dear peggotty? peggotty? is is she she very very angry angry with with me?' me?' i i could could hear hear peggotty peggotty crying crying softly softly on on her her side side of of the the keyhole, keyhole, as as i i was was doing doing on on mine, mine, before before she she answered. answered. 'no. 'no. not not very.' very.' 'what 'what is is going going to to be be done done with with me, me, peggotty peggotty dear? dear? do do you know?' know?' 'school. 'school. near near london,' london,' was was peggotty's peggotty's answer. answer. i i was was obliged obliged to to get get her her to to repeat repeat it, it, for for she she spoke spoke it it the the first first time time quite quite down down my my throat, throat, in in consequence consequence of of my my having having forgotten forgotten to to take take my my mouth mouth away away from from the the keyhole keyhole and and put put my my ear ear there; there; and and though though her her words words tickled tickled me me a a good good deal, deal, i i didn't didn't hear hear them. them. 'when, 'when, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'tomorrow.' 'tomorrow.' 'is 'is that that the the reason reason why why miss miss murdstone murdstone took took the the clothes clothes out out of of my my drawers?' drawers?' which which she she had had done, done, though though i i have have forgotten forgotten to to mention mention it. it. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'box.' 'box.' 'shan't 'shan't i i see see mama?' mama?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'morning.' 'morning.' then then peggotty peggotty fitted fitted her her mouth mouth close close to to the the keyhole, keyhole, and and delivered delivered these these words words through through it it with with as as much much feeling feeling and and earnestness earnestness as as a a keyhole keyhole has has ever ever been been the the medium medium of of communicating, communicating, i i will will venture venture to to assert: assert: shooting shooting in in each each broken broken little little sentence sentence in in a a convulsive convulsive little little burst burst of of its its own. own. 'davy, 'davy, dear. dear. if if i i ain't ain't been been azackly azackly as as intimate intimate with with you. lately, lately, as as i i used used to to be. be. it it ain't ain't because because i i don't don't love love you. just just as as well well and and more, more, my my pretty pretty poppet. poppet. it's it's because because i i thought thought it it better better for for you. and and for for someone someone else else besides. besides. davy, davy, my my darling, darling, are are you listening? listening? can can you hear?' hear?' 'ye-ye-ye-yes, 'ye-ye-ye-yes, peggotty!' peggotty!' i i sobbed. sobbed. 'my 'my own!' own!' said said peggotty, peggotty, with with infinite infinite compassion. compassion. 'what 'what i i want want to to say, say, is. is. that that you must must never never forget forget me. me. for for i'll i'll never never forget forget you. and and i'll i'll take take as as much much care care of of your your mama, mama, davy. davy. as as ever ever i i took took of of you. and and i i won't won't leave leave her. her. the the day day may may come come when when she'll she'll be be glad glad to to lay lay her her poor poor head. head. on on her her stupid, stupid, cross cross old old peggotty's peggotty's arm arm again. again. and and i'll i'll write write to to you, my my dear. dear. though though i i ain't ain't no no scholar. scholar. and and i'll i'll -- -- i'll i'll -- -- ' ' peggotty peggotty fell fell to to kissing kissing the the keyhole, keyhole, as as she she couldn't couldn't kiss kiss me. me. 'thank 'thank you, dear dear peggotty!' peggotty!' said said i. i. 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you! thank thank you! will will you promise promise me me one one thing, thing, peggotty? peggotty? will will you write write and and tell tell mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and little little em'ly, em'ly, and and mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge and and ham, ham, that that i i am am not not so so bad bad as as they they might might suppose, suppose, and and that that i i sent sent 'em 'em all all my my love love -- -- especially especially to to little little em'ly? em'ly? will will you, if if you please, please, peggotty?' peggotty?' the the kind kind soul soul promised, promised, and and we we both both of of us us kissed kissed the the keyhole keyhole with with the the greatest greatest affection affection -- -- i i patted patted it it with with my my hand, hand, i i recollect, recollect, as as if if it it had had been been her her honest honest face face -- -- and and parted. parted. from from that that night night there there grew grew up up in in my my breast breast a a feeling feeling for for peggotty peggotty which which i i cannot cannot very very well well define. define. she she did did not not replace replace my my mother; mother; no no one one could could do do that; that; but but she she came came into into a a vacancy vacancy in in my my heart, heart, which which closed closed upon upon her, her, and and i i felt felt towards towards her her something something i i have have never never felt felt for for any any other other human human being. being. it it was was a a sort sort of of comical comical affection, affection, too; too; and and yet yet if if she she had had died, died, i i cannot cannot think think what what i i should should have have done, done, or or how how i i should should have have acted acted out out the the tragedy tragedy it it would would have have been been to to me. me. in in the the morning morning miss miss murdstone murdstone appeared appeared as as usual, usual, and and told told me me i i was was going going to to school; school; which which was was not not altogether altogether such such news news to to me me as as she she supposed. supposed. she she also also informed informed me me that that when when i i was was dressed, dressed, i i was was to to come come downstairs downstairs into into the the parlour, parlour, and and have have my my breakfast. breakfast. there, there, i i found found my my mother, mother, very very pale pale and and with with red red eyes: eyes: into into whose whose arms arms i i ran, ran, and and begged begged her her pardon pardon from from my my suffering suffering soul. soul. 'oh, 'oh, davy!' davy!' she she said. said. 'that 'that you could could hurt hurt anyone anyone i i love! love! try try to to be be better, better, pray pray to to be be better! better! i i forgive forgive you; but but i i am am so so grieved, grieved, davy, davy, that that you should should have have such such bad bad passions passions in in your your heart.' heart.' they they had had persuaded persuaded her her that that i i was was a a wicked wicked fellow, fellow, and and she she was was more more sorry sorry for for that that than than for for my my going going away. away. i i felt felt it it sorely. sorely. i i tried tried to to eat eat my my parting parting breakfast, breakfast, but but my my tears tears dropped dropped upon upon my my bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter, and and trickled trickled into into my my tea. tea. i i saw saw my my mother mother look look at at me me sometimes, sometimes, and and then then glance glance at at the the watchful watchful miss miss murdstone, murdstone, and and than than look look down, down, or or look look away. away. 'master 'master copperfield's copperfield's box box there!' there!' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, when when wheels wheels were were heard heard at at the the gate. gate. i i looked looked for for peggotty, peggotty, but but it it was was not not she; she; neither neither she she nor nor mr. mr. murdstone murdstone appeared. appeared. my my former former acquaintance, acquaintance, the the carrier, carrier, was was at at the the door. door. the the box box was was taken taken out out to to his his cart, cart, and and lifted lifted in. in. 'clara!' 'clara!' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, in in her her warning warning note. note. 'ready, 'ready, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'good-bye, 'good-bye, davy. davy. you are are going going for for your your own own good. good. good-bye, good-bye, my my child. child. you will will come come home home in in the the holidays, holidays, and and be be a a better better boy.' boy.' 'clara!' 'clara!' miss miss murdstone murdstone repeated. repeated. 'certainly, 'certainly, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' replied replied my my mother, mother, who who was was holding holding me. me. 'i 'i forgive forgive you, my my dear dear boy. boy. god god bless bless you!' 'clara!' 'clara!' miss miss murdstone murdstone repeated. repeated. miss miss murdstone murdstone was was good good enough enough to to take take me me out out to to the the cart, cart, and and to to say say on on the the way way that that she she hoped hoped i i would would repent, repent, before before i i came came to to a a bad bad end; end; and and then then i i got got into into the the cart, cart, and and the the lazy lazy horse horse walked walked off off with with it. it. chapter chapter 5. 5. i i am am sent sent away away from from home home we we might might have have gone gone about about half half a a mile, mile, and and my my pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief was was quite quite wet wet through, through, when when the the carrier carrier stopped stopped short. short. looking looking out out to to ascertain ascertain for for what, what, i i saw, saw, to to my my amazement, amazement, peggotty peggotty burst burst from from a a hedge hedge and and climb climb into into the the cart. cart. she she took took me me in in both both her her arms, arms, and and squeezed squeezed me me to to her her stays stays until until the the pressure pressure on on my my nose nose was was extremely extremely painful, painful, though though i i never never thought thought of of that that till till afterwards afterwards when when i i found found it it very very tender. tender. not not a a single single word word did did peggotty peggotty speak. speak. releasing releasing one one of of her her arms, arms, she she put put it it down down in in her her pocket pocket to to the the elbow, elbow, and and brought brought out out some some paper paper bags bags of of cakes cakes which which she she crammed crammed into into my my pockets, pockets, and and a a purse purse which which she she put put into into my my hand, hand, but but not not one one word word did did she she say. say. after after another another and and a a final final squeeze squeeze with with both both arms, arms, she she got got down down from from the the cart cart and and ran ran away; away; and, and, my my belief belief is, is, and and has has always always been, been, without without a a solitary solitary button button on on her her gown. gown. i i picked picked up up one, one, of of several several that that were were rolling rolling about, about, and and treasured treasured it it as as a a keepsake keepsake for for a a long long time. time. the the carrier carrier looked looked at at me, me, as as if if to to inquire inquire if if she she were were coming coming back. back. i i shook shook my my head, head, and and said said i i thought thought not. not. 'then 'then come come up,' up,' said said the the carrier carrier to to the the lazy lazy horse; horse; who who came came up up accordingly. accordingly. having having by by this this time time cried cried as as much much as as i i possibly possibly could, could, i i began began to to think think it it was was of of no no use use crying crying any any more, more, especially especially as as neither neither roderick roderick random, random, nor nor that that captain captain in in the the royal royal british british navy, navy, had had ever ever cried, cried, that that i i could could remember, remember, in in trying trying situations. situations. the the carrier, carrier, seeing seeing me me in in this this resolution, resolution, proposed proposed that that my my pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief should should be be spread spread upon upon the the horse's horse's back back to to dry. dry. i i thanked thanked him, him, and and assented; assented; and and particularly particularly small small it it looked, looked, under under those those circumstances. circumstances. i i had had now now leisure leisure to to examine examine the the purse. purse. it it was was a a stiff stiff leather leather purse, purse, with with a a snap, snap, and and had had three three bright bright shillings shillings in in it, it, which which peggotty peggotty had had evidently evidently polished polished up up with with whitening, whitening, for for my my greater greater delight. delight. but but its its most most precious precious contents contents were were two two half-crowns half-crowns folded folded together together in in a a bit bit of of paper, paper, on on which which was was written, written, in in my my mother's mother's hand, hand, 'for 'for davy. davy. with with my my love.' love.' i i was was so so overcome overcome by by this, this, that that i i asked asked the the carrier carrier to to be be so so good good as as to to reach reach me me my my pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief again; again; but but he he said said he he thought thought i i had had better better do do without without it, it, and and i i thought thought i i really really had, had, so so i i wiped wiped my my eyes eyes on on my my sleeve sleeve and and stopped stopped myself. myself. for for good, good, too; too; though, though, in in consequence consequence of of my my previous previous emotions, emotions, i i was was still still occasionally occasionally seized seized with with a a stormy stormy sob. sob. after after we we had had jogged jogged on on for for some some little little time, time, i i asked asked the the carrier carrier if if he he was was going going all all the the way. way. 'all 'all the the way way where?' where?' inquired inquired the the carrier. carrier. 'there,' 'there,' i i said. said. 'where's 'where's there?' there?' inquired inquired the the carrier. carrier. 'near 'near london,' london,' i i said. said. 'why 'why that that horse,' horse,' said said the the carrier, carrier, jerking jerking the the rein rein to to point point him him out, out, 'would 'would be be deader deader than than pork pork afore afore he he got got over over half half the the ground.' ground.' 'are 'are you only only going going to to yarmouth yarmouth then?' then?' i i asked. asked. 'that's 'that's about about it,' it,' said said the the carrier. carrier. 'and 'and there there i i shall shall take take you to to the the stage-cutch, stage-cutch, and and the the stage-cutch stage-cutch that'll that'll take take you to to -- -- wherever wherever it it is.' is.' as as this this was was a a great great deal deal for for the the carrier carrier (whose (whose name name was was mr. mr. barkis) barkis) to to say say -- -- he he being, being, as as i i observed observed in in a a former former chapter, chapter, of of a a phlegmatic phlegmatic temperament, temperament, and and not not at at all all conversational conversational -- -- i i offered offered him him a a cake cake as as a a mark mark of of attention, attention, which which he he ate ate at at one one gulp, gulp, exactly exactly like like an an elephant, elephant, and and which which made made no no more more impression impression on on his his big big face face than than it it would would have have done done on on an an elephant's. elephant's. 'did 'did she she make make 'em, 'em, now?' now?' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, always always leaning leaning forward, forward, in in his his slouching slouching way, way, on on the the footboard footboard of of the the cart cart with with an an arm arm on on each each knee. knee. 'peggotty, 'peggotty, do do you mean, mean, sir?' sir?' 'ah!' 'ah!' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'her.' 'her.' 'yes. 'yes. she she makes makes all all our our pastry, pastry, and and does does all all our our cooking.' cooking.' 'do 'do she she though?' though?' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. he he made made up up his his mouth mouth as as if if to to whistle, whistle, but but he he didn't didn't whistle. whistle. he he sat sat looking looking at at the the horse's horse's ears, ears, as as if if he he saw saw something something new new there; there; and and sat sat so, so, for for a a considerable considerable time. time. by by and and by, by, he he said: said: 'no 'no sweethearts, sweethearts, i i b'lieve?' b'lieve?' 'sweetmeats 'sweetmeats did did you say, say, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' for for i i thought thought he he wanted wanted something something else else to to eat, eat, and and had had pointedly pointedly alluded alluded to to that that description description of of refreshment. refreshment. 'hearts,' 'hearts,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'sweet 'sweet hearts; hearts; no no person person walks walks with with her!' her!' 'with 'with peggotty?' peggotty?' 'ah!' 'ah!' he he said. said. 'her.' 'her.' 'oh, 'oh, no. no. she she never never had had a a sweetheart.' sweetheart.' 'didn't 'didn't she, she, though!' though!' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. again again he he made made up up his his mouth mouth to to whistle, whistle, and and again again he he didn't didn't whistle, whistle, but but sat sat looking looking at at the the horse's horse's ears. ears. 'so 'so she she makes,' makes,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, after after a a long long interval interval of of reflection, reflection, 'all 'all the the apple apple parsties, parsties, and and doos doos all all the the cooking, cooking, do do she?' she?' i i replied replied that that such such was was the the fact. fact. 'well. 'well. i'll i'll tell tell you what,' what,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'p'raps 'p'raps you might might be be writin' writin' to to her?' her?' 'i 'i shall shall certainly certainly write write to to her,' her,' i i rejoined. rejoined. 'ah!' 'ah!' he he said, said, slowly slowly turning turning his his eyes eyes towards towards me. me. 'well! 'well! if if you was was writin' writin' to to her, her, p'raps p'raps you'd you'd recollect recollect to to say say that that barkis barkis was was willin'; willin'; would would you?' 'that 'that barkis barkis is is willing,' willing,' i i repeated, repeated, innocently. innocently. 'is 'is that that all all the the message?' message?' 'ye-es,' 'ye-es,' he he said, said, considering. considering. 'ye-es. 'ye-es. barkis barkis is is willin'.' willin'.' 'but 'but you will will be be at at blunderstone blunderstone again again tomorrow, tomorrow, mr. mr. barkis,' barkis,' i i said, said, faltering faltering a a little little at at the the idea idea of of my my being being far far away away from from it it then, then, and and could could give give your your own own message message so so much much better.' better.' as as he he repudiated repudiated this this suggestion, suggestion, however, however, with with a a jerk jerk of of his his head, head, and and once once more more confirmed confirmed his his previous previous request request by by saying, saying, with with profound profound gravity, gravity, 'barkis 'barkis is is willin'. willin'. that's that's the the message,' message,' i i readily readily undertook undertook its its transmission. transmission. while while i i was was waiting waiting for for the the coach coach in in the the hotel hotel at at yarmouth yarmouth that that very very afternoon, afternoon, i i procured procured a a sheet sheet of of paper paper and and an an inkstand, inkstand, and and wrote wrote a a note note to to peggotty, peggotty, which which ran ran thus: thus: 'my 'my dear dear peggotty. peggotty. i i have have come come here here safe. safe. barkis barkis is is willing. willing. my my love love to to mama. mama. yours yours affectionately. affectionately. p.s. p.s. he he says says he he particularly particularly wants wants you to to know know -- -- barkis barkis is is willing.' willing.' when when i i had had taken taken this this commission commission on on myself myself prospectively, prospectively, mr. mr. barkis barkis relapsed relapsed into into perfect perfect silence; silence; and and i, i, feeling feeling quite quite worn worn out out by by all all that that had had happened happened lately, lately, lay lay down down on on a a sack sack in in the the cart cart and and fell fell asleep. asleep. i i slept slept soundly soundly until until we we got got to to yarmouth; yarmouth; which which was was so so entirely entirely new new and and strange strange to to me me in in the the inn-yard inn-yard to to which which we we drove, drove, that that i i at at once once abandoned abandoned a a latent latent hope hope i i had had had had of of meeting meeting with with some some of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's family family there, there, perhaps perhaps even even with with little little em'ly em'ly herself. herself. the the coach coach was was in in the the yard, yard, shining shining very very much much all all over, over, but but without without any any horses horses to to it it as as yet; yet; and and it it looked looked in in that that state state as as if if nothing nothing was was more more unlikely unlikely than than its its ever ever going going to to london. london. i i was was thinking thinking this, this, and and wondering wondering what what would would ultimately ultimately become become of of my my box, box, which which mr. mr. barkis barkis had had put put down down on on the the yard-pavement yard-pavement by by the the pole pole (he (he having having driven driven up up the the yard yard to to turn turn his his cart), cart), and and also also what what would would ultimately ultimately become become of of me, me, when when a a lady lady looked looked out out of of a a bow-window bow-window where where some some fowls fowls and and joints joints of of meat meat were were hanging hanging up, up, and and said: said: 'is 'is that that the the little little gentleman gentleman from from blunderstone?' blunderstone?' 'yes, 'yes, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i said. said. 'what 'what name?' name?' inquired inquired the the lady. lady. 'copperfield, 'copperfield, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i said. said. 'that 'that won't won't do,' do,' returned returned the the lady. lady. 'nobody's 'nobody's dinner dinner is is paid paid for for here, here, in in that that name.' name.' 'is 'is it it murdstone, murdstone, ma'am?' ma'am?' i i said. said. 'if 'if you're you're master master murdstone,' murdstone,' said said the the lady, lady, 'why 'why do do you go go and and give give another another name, name, first?' first?' i i explained explained to to the the lady lady how how it it was, was, who who than than rang rang a a bell, bell, and and called called out, out, 'william! 'william! show show the the coffee-room!' coffee-room!' upon upon which which a a waiter waiter came came running running out out of of a a kitchen kitchen on on the the opposite opposite side side of of the the yard yard to to show show it, it, and and seemed seemed a a good good deal deal surprised surprised when when he he was was only only to to show show it it to to me. me. it it was was a a large large long long room room with with some some large large maps maps in in it. it. i i doubt doubt if if i i could could have have felt felt much much stranger stranger if if the the maps maps had had been been real real foreign foreign countries, countries, and and i i cast cast away away in in the the middle middle of of them. them. i i felt felt it it was was taking taking a a liberty liberty to to sit sit down, down, with with my my cap cap in in my my hand, hand, on on the the corner corner of of the the chair chair nearest nearest the the door; door; and and when when the the waiter waiter laid laid a a cloth cloth on on purpose purpose for for me, me, and and put put a a set set of of castors castors on on it, it, i i think think i i must must have have turned turned red red all all over over with with modesty. modesty. he he brought brought me me some some chops, chops, and and vegetables, vegetables, and and took took the the covers covers off off in in such such a a bouncing bouncing manner manner that that i i was was afraid afraid i i must must have have given given him him some some offence. offence. but but he he greatly greatly relieved relieved my my mind mind by by putting putting a a chair chair for for me me at at the the table, table, and and saying, saying, very very affably, affably, 'now, 'now, six-foot! six-foot! come come on!' on!' i i thanked thanked him, him, and and took took my my seat seat at at the the board; board; but but found found it it extremely extremely difficult difficult to to handle handle my my knife knife and and fork fork with with anything anything like like dexterity, dexterity, or or to to avoid avoid splashing splashing myself myself with with the the gravy, gravy, while while he he was was standing standing opposite, opposite, staring staring so so hard, hard, and and making making me me blush blush in in the the most most dreadful dreadful manner manner every every time time i i caught caught his his eye. eye. after after watching watching me me into into the the second second chop, chop, he he said: said: 'there's 'there's half half a a pint pint of of ale ale for for you. will will you have have it it now?' now?' i i thanked thanked him him and and said, said, 'yes.' 'yes.' upon upon which which he he poured poured it it out out of of a a jug jug into into a a large large tumbler, tumbler, and and held held it it up up against against the the light, light, and and made made it it look look beautiful. beautiful. 'my 'my eye!' eye!' he he said. said. 'it 'it seems seems a a good good deal, deal, don't don't it?' it?' 'it 'it does does seem seem a a good good deal,' deal,' i i answered answered with with a a smile. smile. for for it it was was quite quite delightful delightful to to me, me, to to find find him him so so pleasant. pleasant. he he was was a a twinkling-eyed, twinkling-eyed, pimple-faced pimple-faced man, man, with with his his hair hair standing standing upright upright all all over over his his head; head; and and as as he he stood stood with with one one arm arm a-kimbo, a-kimbo, holding holding up up the the glass glass to to the the light light with with the the other other hand, hand, he he looked looked quite quite friendly. friendly. 'there 'there was was a a gentleman gentleman here, here, yesterday,' yesterday,' he he said said -- -- 'a 'a stout stout gentleman, gentleman, by by the the name name of of topsawyer topsawyer -- -- perhaps perhaps you know know him?' him?' 'no,' 'no,' i i said, said, 'i 'i don't don't think think -- -- ' ' 'in 'in breeches breeches and and gaiters, gaiters, broad-brimmed broad-brimmed hat, hat, grey grey coat, coat, speckled speckled choker,' choker,' said said the the waiter. waiter. 'no,' 'no,' i i said said bashfully, bashfully, 'i 'i haven't haven't the the pleasure pleasure -- -- ' ' 'he 'he came came in in here,' here,' said said the the waiter, waiter, looking looking at at the the light light through through the the tumbler, tumbler, 'ordered 'ordered a a glass glass of of this this ale ale -- -- would would order order it it -- -- i i told told him him not not -- -- drank drank it, it, and and fell fell dead. dead. it it was was too too old old for for him. him. it it oughtn't oughtn't to to be be drawn; drawn; that's that's the the fact.' fact.' i i was was very very much much shocked shocked to to hear hear of of this this melancholy melancholy accident, accident, and and said said i i thought thought i i had had better better have have some some water. water. 'why 'why you see,' see,' said said the the waiter, waiter, still still looking looking at at the the light light through through the the tumbler, tumbler, with with one one of of his his eyes eyes shut shut up, up, 'our 'our people people don't don't like like things things being being ordered ordered and and left. left. it it offends offends 'em. 'em. but but i'll i'll drink drink it, it, if if you like. like. i'm i'm used used to to it, it, and and use use is is everything. everything. i i don't don't think think it'll it'll hurt hurt me, me, if if i i throw throw my my head head back, back, and and take take it it off off quick. quick. shall shall i?' i?' i i replied replied that that he he would would much much oblige oblige me me by by drinking drinking it, it, if if he he thought thought he he could could do do it it safely, safely, but but by by no no means means otherwise. otherwise. when when he he did did throw throw his his head head back, back, and and take take it it off off quick, quick, i i had had a a horrible horrible fear, fear, i i confess, confess, of of seeing seeing him him meet meet the the fate fate of of the the lamented lamented mr. mr. topsawyer, topsawyer, and and fall fall lifeless lifeless on on the the carpet. carpet. but but it it didn't didn't hurt hurt him. him. on on the the contrary, contrary, i i thought thought he he seemed seemed the the fresher fresher for for it. it. 'what 'what have have we we got got here?' here?' he he said, said, putting putting a a fork fork into into my my dish. dish. 'not 'not chops?' chops?' 'chops,' 'chops,' i i said. said. 'lord 'lord bless bless my my soul!' soul!' he he exclaimed, exclaimed, 'i 'i didn't didn't know know they they were were chops. chops. why, why, a a chop's chop's the the very very thing thing to to take take off off the the bad bad effects effects of of that that beer! beer! ain't ain't it it lucky?' lucky?' so so he he took took a a chop chop by by the the bone bone in in one one hand, hand, and and a a potato potato in in the the other, other, and and ate ate away away with with a a very very good good appetite, appetite, to to my my extreme extreme satisfaction. satisfaction. he he afterwards afterwards took took another another chop, chop, and and another another potato; potato; and and after after that, that, another another chop chop and and another another potato. potato. when when we we had had done, done, he he brought brought me me a a pudding, pudding, and and having having set set it it before before me, me, seemed seemed to to ruminate, ruminate, and and to to become become absent absent in in his his mind mind for for some some moments. moments. 'how's 'how's the the pie?' pie?' he he said, said, rousing rousing himself. himself. 'it's 'it's a a pudding,' pudding,' i i made made answer. answer. 'pudding!' 'pudding!' he he exclaimed. exclaimed. 'why, 'why, bless bless me, me, so so it it is! is! what!' what!' looking looking at at it it nearer. nearer. 'you don't don't mean mean to to say say it's it's a a batter-pudding!' batter-pudding!' 'yes, 'yes, it it is is indeed.' indeed.' 'why, 'why, a a batter-pudding,' batter-pudding,' he he said, said, taking taking up up a a table-spoon, table-spoon, 'is 'is my my favourite favourite pudding! pudding! ain't ain't that that lucky? lucky? come come on, on, little little 'un, 'un, and and let's let's see see who'll who'll get get most.' most.' the the waiter waiter certainly certainly got got most. most. he he entreated entreated me me more more than than once once to to come come in in and and win, win, but but what what with with his his table-spoon table-spoon to to my my tea-spoon, tea-spoon, his his dispatch dispatch to to my my dispatch, dispatch, and and his his appetite appetite to to my my appetite, appetite, i i was was left left far far behind behind at at the the first first mouthful, mouthful, and and had had no no chance chance with with him. him. i i never never saw saw anyone anyone enjoy enjoy a a pudding pudding so so much, much, i i think; think; and and he he laughed, laughed, when when it it was was all all gone, gone, as as if if his his enjoyment enjoyment of of it it lasted lasted still. still. finding finding him him so so very very friendly friendly and and companionable, companionable, it it was was then then that that i i asked asked for for the the pen pen and and ink ink and and paper, paper, to to write write to to peggotty. peggotty. he he not not only only brought brought it it immediately, immediately, but but was was good good enough enough to to look look over over me me while while i i wrote wrote the the letter. letter. when when i i had had finished finished it, it, he he asked asked me me where where i i was was going going to to school. school. i i said, said, 'near 'near london,' london,' which which was was all all i i knew. knew. 'oh! 'oh! my my eye!' eye!' he he said, said, looking looking very very low-spirited, low-spirited, 'i 'i am am sorry sorry for for that.' that.' 'why?' 'why?' i i asked asked him. him. 'oh, 'oh, lord!' lord!' he he said, said, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'that's 'that's the the school school where where they they broke broke the the boy's boy's ribs ribs -- -- two two ribs ribs -- -- a a little little boy boy he he was. was. i i should should say say he he was was -- -- let let me me see see -- -- how how old old are are you, about?' about?' i i told told him him between between eight eight and and nine. nine. 'that's 'that's just just his his age,' age,' he he said. said. 'he 'he was was eight eight years years and and six six months months old old when when they they broke broke his his first first rib; rib; eight eight years years and and eight eight months months old old when when they they broke broke his his second, second, and and did did for for him.' him.' i i could could not not disguise disguise from from myself, myself, or or from from the the waiter, waiter, that that this this was was an an uncomfortable uncomfortable coincidence, coincidence, and and inquired inquired how how it it was was done. done. his his answer answer was was not not cheering cheering to to my my spirits, spirits, for for it it consisted consisted of of two two dismal dismal words, words, 'with 'with whopping.' whopping.' the the blowing blowing of of the the coach-horn coach-horn in in the the yard yard was was a a seasonable seasonable diversion, diversion, which which made made me me get get up up and and hesitatingly hesitatingly inquire, inquire, in in the the mingled mingled pride pride and and diffidence diffidence of of having having a a purse purse (which (which i i took took out out of of my my pocket), pocket), if if there there were were anything anything to to pay. pay. 'there's 'there's a a sheet sheet of of letter-paper,' letter-paper,' he he returned. returned. 'did 'did you ever ever buy buy a a sheet sheet of of letter-paper?' letter-paper?' i i could could not not remember remember that that i i ever ever had. had. 'it's 'it's dear,' dear,' he he said, said, 'on 'on account account of of the the duty. duty. threepence. threepence. that's that's the the way way we're we're taxed taxed in in this this country. country. there's there's nothing nothing else, else, except except the the waiter. waiter. never never mind mind the the ink. ink. i i lose lose by by that.' that.' 'what 'what should should you -- -- what what should should i i -- -- how how much much ought ought i i to to -- -- what what would would it it be be right right to to pay pay the the waiter, waiter, if if you please?' please?' i i stammered, stammered, blushing. blushing. 'if 'if i i hadn't hadn't a a family, family, and and that that family family hadn't hadn't the the cowpock,' cowpock,' said said the the waiter, waiter, 'i 'i wouldn't wouldn't take take a a sixpence. sixpence. if if i i didn't didn't support support a a aged aged pairint, pairint, and and a a lovely lovely sister,' sister,' -- -- here here the the waiter waiter was was greatly greatly agitated agitated -- -- 'i 'i wouldn't wouldn't take take a a farthing. farthing. if if i i had had a a good good place, place, and and was was treated treated well well here, here, i i should should beg beg acceptance acceptance of of a a trifle, trifle, instead instead of of taking taking of of it. it. but but i i live live on on broken broken wittles wittles -- -- and and i i sleep sleep on on the the coals' coals' -- -- here here the the waiter waiter burst burst into into tears. tears. i i was was very very much much concerned concerned for for his his misfortunes, misfortunes, and and felt felt that that any any recognition recognition short short of of ninepence ninepence would would be be mere mere brutality brutality and and hardness hardness of of heart. heart. therefore therefore i i gave gave him him one one of of my my three three bright bright shillings, shillings, which which he he received received with with much much humility humility and and veneration, veneration, and and spun spun up up with with his his thumb, thumb, directly directly afterwards, afterwards, to to try try the the goodness goodness of. of. it it was was a a little little disconcerting disconcerting to to me, me, to to find, find, when when i i was was being being helped helped up up behind behind the the coach, coach, that that i i was was supposed supposed to to have have eaten eaten all all the the dinner dinner without without any any assistance. assistance. i i discovered discovered this, this, from from overhearing overhearing the the lady lady in in the the bow-window bow-window say say to to the the guard, guard, 'take 'take care care of of that that child, child, george, george, or or he'll he'll burst!' burst!' and and from from observing observing that that the the women-servants women-servants who who were were about about the the place place came came out out to to look look and and giggle giggle at at me me as as a a young young phenomenon. phenomenon. my my unfortunate unfortunate friend friend the the waiter, waiter, who who had had quite quite recovered recovered his his spirits, spirits, did did not not appear appear to to be be disturbed disturbed by by this, this, but but joined joined in in the the general general admiration admiration without without being being at at all all confused. confused. if if i i had had any any doubt doubt of of him, him, i i suppose suppose this this half half awakened awakened it; it; but but i i am am inclined inclined to to believe believe that that with with the the simple simple confidence confidence of of a a child, child, and and the the natural natural reliance reliance of of a a child child upon upon superior superior years years (qualities (qualities i i am am very very sorry sorry any any children children should should prematurely prematurely change change for for worldly worldly wisdom), wisdom), i i had had no no serious serious mistrust mistrust of of him him on on the the whole, whole, even even then. then. i i felt felt it it rather rather hard, hard, i i must must own, own, to to be be made, made, without without deserving deserving it, it, the the subject subject of of jokes jokes between between the the coachman coachman and and guard guard as as to to the the coach coach drawing drawing heavy heavy behind, behind, on on account account of of my my sitting sitting there, there, and and as as to to the the greater greater expediency expediency of of my my travelling travelling by by waggon. waggon. the the story story of of my my supposed supposed appetite appetite getting getting wind wind among among the the outside outside passengers, passengers, they they were were merry merry upon upon it it likewise; likewise; and and asked asked me me whether whether i i was was going going to to be be paid paid for, for, at at school, school, as as two two brothers brothers or or three, three, and and whether whether i i was was contracted contracted for, for, or or went went upon upon the the regular regular terms; terms; with with other other pleasant pleasant questions. questions. but but the the worst worst of of it it was, was, that that i i knew knew i i should should be be ashamed ashamed to to eat eat anything, anything, when when an an opportunity opportunity offered, offered, and and that, that, after after a a rather rather light light dinner, dinner, i i should should remain remain hungry hungry all all night night -- -- for for i i had had left left my my cakes cakes behind, behind, at at the the hotel, hotel, in in my my hurry. hurry. my my apprehensions apprehensions were were realized. realized. when when we we stopped stopped for for supper supper i i couldn't couldn't muster muster courage courage to to take take any, any, though though i i should should have have liked liked it it very very much, much, but but sat sat by by the the fire fire and and said said i i didn't didn't want want anything. anything. this this did did not not save save me me from from more more jokes, jokes, either; either; for for a a husky-voiced husky-voiced gentleman gentleman with with a a rough rough face, face, who who had had been been eating eating out out of of a a sandwich-box sandwich-box nearly nearly all all the the way, way, except except when when he he had had been been drinking drinking out out of of a a bottle, bottle, said said i i was was like like a a boa-constrictor boa-constrictor who who took took enough enough at at one one meal meal to to last last him him a a long long time; time; after after which, which, he he actually actually brought brought a a rash rash out out upon upon himself himself with with boiled boiled beef. beef. we we had had started started from from yarmouth yarmouth at at three three o'clock o'clock in in the the afternoon, afternoon, and and we we were were due due in in london london about about eight eight next next morning. morning. it it was was mid-summer mid-summer weather, weather, and and the the evening evening was was very very pleasant. pleasant. when when we we passed passed through through a a village, village, i i pictured pictured to to myself myself what what the the insides insides of of the the houses houses were were like, like, and and what what the the inhabitants inhabitants were were about; about; and and when when boys boys came came running running after after us, us, and and got got up up behind behind and and swung swung there there for for a a little little way, way, i i wondered wondered whether whether their their fathers fathers were were alive, alive, and and whether whether they they were were happy happy at at home. home. i i had had plenty plenty to to think think of, of, therefore, therefore, besides besides my my mind mind running running continually continually on on the the kind kind of of place place i i was was going going to to -- -- which which was was an an awful awful speculation. speculation. sometimes, sometimes, i i remember, remember, i i resigned resigned myself myself to to thoughts thoughts of of home home and and peggotty; peggotty; and and to to endeavouring, endeavouring, in in a a confused confused blind blind way, way, to to recall recall how how i i had had felt, felt, and and what what sort sort of of boy boy i i used used to to be, be, before before i i bit bit mr. mr. murdstone: murdstone: which which i i couldn't couldn't satisfy satisfy myself myself about about by by any any means, means, i i seemed seemed to to have have bitten bitten him him in in such such a a remote remote antiquity. antiquity. the the night night was was not not so so pleasant pleasant as as the the evening, evening, for for it it got got chilly; chilly; and and being being put put between between two two gentlemen gentlemen (the (the rough-faced rough-faced one one and and another) another) to to prevent prevent my my tumbling tumbling off off the the coach, coach, i i was was nearly nearly smothered smothered by by their their falling falling asleep, asleep, and and completely completely blocking blocking me me up. up. they they squeezed squeezed me me so so hard hard sometimes, sometimes, that that i i could could not not help help crying crying out, out, 'oh! 'oh! if if you please!' please!' -- -- which which they they didn't didn't like like at at all, all, because because it it woke woke them. them. opposite opposite me me was was an an elderly elderly lady lady in in a a great great fur fur cloak, cloak, who who looked looked in in the the dark dark more more like like a a haystack haystack than than a a lady, lady, she she was was wrapped wrapped up up to to such such a a degree. degree. this this lady lady had had a a basket basket with with her, her, and and she she hadn't hadn't known known what what to to do do with with it, it, for for a a long long time, time, until until she she found found that that on on account account of of my my legs legs being being short, short, it it could could go go underneath underneath me. me. it it cramped cramped and and hurt hurt me me so, so, that that it it made made me me perfectly perfectly miserable; miserable; but but if if i i moved moved in in the the least, least, and and made made a a glass glass that that was was in in the the basket basket rattle rattle against against something something else else (as (as it it was was sure sure to to do), do), she she gave gave me me the the cruellest cruellest poke poke with with her her foot, foot, and and said, said, 'come, 'come, don't don't you fidget. fidget. your your bones bones are are young young enough, enough, i'm i'm sure!' sure!' at at last last the the sun sun rose, rose, and and then then my my companions companions seemed seemed to to sleep sleep easier. easier. the the difficulties difficulties under under which which they they had had laboured laboured all all night, night, and and which which had had found found utterance utterance in in the the most most terrific terrific gasps gasps and and snorts, snorts, are are not not to to be be conceived. conceived. as as the the sun sun got got higher, higher, their their sleep sleep became became lighter, lighter, and and so so they they gradually gradually one one by by one one awoke. awoke. i i recollect recollect being being very very much much surprised surprised by by the the feint feint everybody everybody made, made, then, then, of of not not having having been been to to sleep sleep at at all, all, and and by by the the uncommon uncommon indignation indignation with with which which everyone everyone repelled repelled the the charge. charge. i i labour labour under under the the same same kind kind of of astonishment astonishment to to this this day, day, having having invariably invariably observed observed that that of of all all human human weaknesses, weaknesses, the the one one to to which which our our common common nature nature is is the the least least disposed disposed to to confess confess (i (i cannot cannot imagine imagine why) why) is is the the weakness weakness of of having having gone gone to to sleep sleep in in a a coach. coach. what what an an amazing amazing place place london london was was to to me me when when i i saw saw it it in in the the distance, distance, and and how how i i believed believed all all the the adventures adventures of of all all my my favourite favourite heroes heroes to to be be constantly constantly enacting enacting and and re-enacting re-enacting there, there, and and how how i i vaguely vaguely made made it it out out in in my my own own mind mind to to be be fuller fuller of of wonders wonders and and wickedness wickedness than than all all the the cities cities of of the the earth, earth, i i need need not not stop stop here here to to relate. relate. we we approached approached it it by by degrees, degrees, and and got, got, in in due due time, time, to to the the inn inn in in the the whitechapel whitechapel district, district, for for which which we we were were bound. bound. i i forget forget whether whether it it was was the the blue blue bull, bull, or or the the blue blue boar; boar; but but i i know know it it was was the the blue blue something, something, and and that that its its likeness likeness was was painted painted up up on on the the back back of of the the coach. coach. the the guard's guard's eye eye lighted lighted on on me me as as he he was was getting getting down, down, and and he he said said at at the the booking-office booking-office door: door: 'is 'is there there anybody anybody here here for for a a yoongster yoongster booked booked in in the the name name of of murdstone, murdstone, from from bloonderstone, bloonderstone, sooffolk, sooffolk, to to be be left left till till called called for?' for?' nobody nobody answered. answered. 'try 'try copperfield, copperfield, if if you please, please, sir,' sir,' said said i, i, looking looking helplessly helplessly down. down. 'is 'is there there anybody anybody here here for for a a yoongster, yoongster, booked booked in in the the name name of of murdstone, murdstone, from from bloonderstone, bloonderstone, sooffolk, sooffolk, but but owning owning to to the the name name of of copperfield, copperfield, to to be be left left till till called called for?' for?' said said the the guard. guard. 'come! 'come! is is there there anybody?' anybody?' no. no. there there was was nobody. nobody. i i looked looked anxiously anxiously around; around; but but the the inquiry inquiry made made no no impression impression on on any any of of the the bystanders, bystanders, if if i i except except a a man man in in gaiters, gaiters, with with one one eye, eye, who who suggested suggested that that they they had had better better put put a a brass brass collar collar round round my my neck, neck, and and tie tie me me up up in in the the stable. stable. a a ladder ladder was was brought, brought, and and i i got got down down after after the the lady, lady, who who was was like like a a haystack: haystack: not not daring daring to to stir, stir, until until her her basket basket was was removed. removed. the the coach coach was was clear clear of of passengers passengers by by that that time, time, the the luggage luggage was was very very soon soon cleared cleared out, out, the the horses horses had had been been taken taken out out before before the the luggage, luggage, and and now now the the coach coach itself itself was was wheeled wheeled and and backed backed off off by by some some hostlers, hostlers, out out of of the the way. way. still, still, nobody nobody appeared, appeared, to to claim claim the the dusty dusty youngster youngster from from blunderstone, blunderstone, suffolk. suffolk. more more solitary solitary than than robinson robinson crusoe, crusoe, who who had had nobody nobody to to look look at at him him and and see see that that he he was was solitary, solitary, i i went went into into the the booking-office, booking-office, and, and, by by invitation invitation of of the the clerk clerk on on duty, duty, passed passed behind behind the the counter, counter, and and sat sat down down on on the the scale scale at at which which they they weighed weighed the the luggage. luggage. here, here, as as i i sat sat looking looking at at the the parcels, parcels, packages, packages, and and books, books, and and inhaling inhaling the the smell smell of of stables stables (ever (ever since since associated associated with with that that morning), morning), a a procession procession of of most most tremendous tremendous considerations considerations began began to to march march through through my my mind. mind. supposing supposing nobody nobody should should ever ever fetch fetch me, me, how how long long would would they they consent consent to to keep keep me me there? there? would would they they keep keep me me long long enough enough to to spend spend seven seven shillings? shillings? should should i i sleep sleep at at night night in in one one of of those those wooden wooden bins, bins, with with the the other other luggage, luggage, and and wash wash myself myself at at the the pump pump in in the the yard yard in in the the morning; morning; or or should should i i be be turned turned out out every every night, night, and and expected expected to to come come again again to to be be left left till till called called for, for, when when the the office office opened opened next next day? day? supposing supposing there there was was no no mistake mistake in in the the case, case, and and mr. mr. murdstone murdstone had had devised devised this this plan plan to to get get rid rid of of me, me, what what should should i i do? do? if if they they allowed allowed me me to to remain remain there there until until my my seven seven shillings shillings were were spent, spent, i i couldn't couldn't hope hope to to remain remain there there when when i i began began to to starve. starve. that that would would obviously obviously be be inconvenient inconvenient and and unpleasant unpleasant to to the the customers, customers, besides besides entailing entailing on on the the blue blue whatever-it-was, whatever-it-was, the the risk risk of of funeral funeral expenses. expenses. if if i i started started off off at at once, once, and and tried tried to to walk walk back back home, home, how how could could i i ever ever find find my my way, way, how how could could i i ever ever hope hope to to walk walk so so far, far, how how could could i i make make sure sure of of anyone anyone but but peggotty, peggotty, even even if if i i got got back? back? if if i i found found out out the the nearest nearest proper proper authorities, authorities, and and offered offered myself myself to to go go for for a a soldier, soldier, or or a a sailor, sailor, i i was was such such a a little little fellow fellow that that it it was was most most likely likely they they wouldn't wouldn't take take me me in. in. these these thoughts, thoughts, and and a a hundred hundred other other such such thoughts, thoughts, turned turned me me burning burning hot, hot, and and made made me me giddy giddy with with apprehension apprehension and and dismay. dismay. i i was was in in the the height height of of my my fever fever when when a a man man entered entered and and whispered whispered to to the the clerk, clerk, who who presently presently slanted slanted me me off off the the scale, scale, and and pushed pushed me me over over to to him, him, as as if if i i were were weighed, weighed, bought, bought, delivered, delivered, and and paid paid for. for. as as i i went went out out of of the the office, office, hand hand in in hand hand with with this this new new acquaintance, acquaintance, i i stole stole a a look look at at him. him. he he was was a a gaunt, gaunt, sallow sallow young young man, man, with with hollow hollow cheeks, cheeks, and and a a chin chin almost almost as as black black as as mr. mr. murdstone's; murdstone's; but but there there the the likeness likeness ended, ended, for for his his whiskers whiskers were were shaved shaved off, off, and and his his hair, hair, instead instead of of being being glossy, glossy, was was rusty rusty and and dry. dry. he he was was dressed dressed in in a a suit suit of of black black clothes clothes which which were were rather rather rusty rusty and and dry dry too, too, and and rather rather short short in in the the sleeves sleeves and and legs; legs; and and he he had had a a white white neck-kerchief neck-kerchief on, on, that that was was not not over-clean. over-clean. i i did did not, not, and and do do not, not, suppose suppose that that this this neck-kerchief neck-kerchief was was all all the the linen linen he he wore, wore, but but it it was was all all he he showed showed or or gave gave any any hint hint of. of. 'you're 'you're the the new new boy?' boy?' he he said. said. 'yes, 'yes, sir,' sir,' i i said. said. i i supposed supposed i i was. was. i i didn't didn't know. know. 'i'm 'i'm one one of of the the masters masters at at salem salem house,' house,' he he said. said. i i made made him him a a bow bow and and felt felt very very much much overawed. overawed. i i was was so so ashamed ashamed to to allude allude to to a a commonplace commonplace thing thing like like my my box, box, to to a a scholar scholar and and a a master master at at salem salem house, house, that that we we had had gone gone some some little little distance distance from from the the yard yard before before i i had had the the hardihood hardihood to to mention mention it. it. we we turned turned back, back, on on my my humbly humbly insinuating insinuating that that it it might might be be useful useful to to me me hereafter; hereafter; and and he he told told the the clerk clerk that that the the carrier carrier had had instructions instructions to to call call for for it it at at noon. noon. 'if 'if you please, please, sir,' sir,' i i said, said, when when we we had had accomplished accomplished about about the the same same distance distance as as before, before, 'is 'is it it far?' far?' 'it's 'it's down down by by blackheath,' blackheath,' he he said. said. 'is 'is that that far, far, sir?' sir?' i i diffidently diffidently asked. asked. 'it's 'it's a a good good step,' step,' he he said. said. 'we 'we shall shall go go by by the the stage-coach. stage-coach. it's it's about about six six miles.' miles.' i i was was so so faint faint and and tired, tired, that that the the idea idea of of holding holding out out for for six six miles miles more, more, was was too too much much for for me. me. i i took took heart heart to to tell tell him him that that i i had had had had nothing nothing all all night, night, and and that that if if he he would would allow allow me me to to buy buy something something to to eat, eat, i i should should be be very very much much obliged obliged to to him. him. he he appeared appeared surprised surprised at at this this -- -- i i see see him him stop stop and and look look at at me me now now -- -- and and after after considering considering for for a a few few moments, moments, said said he he wanted wanted to to call call on on an an old old person person who who lived lived not not far far off, off, and and that that the the best best way way would would be be for for me me to to buy buy some some bread, bread, or or whatever whatever i i liked liked best best that that was was wholesome, wholesome, and and make make my my breakfast breakfast at at her her house, house, where where we we could could get get some some milk. milk. accordingly accordingly we we looked looked in in at at a a baker's baker's window, window, and and after after i i had had made made a a series series of of proposals proposals to to buy buy everything everything that that was was bilious bilious in in the the shop, shop, and and he he had had rejected rejected them them one one by by one, one, we we decided decided in in favour favour of of a a nice nice little little loaf loaf of of brown brown bread, bread, which which cost cost me me threepence. threepence. then, then, at at a a grocer's grocer's shop, shop, we we bought bought an an egg egg and and a a slice slice of of streaky streaky bacon; bacon; which which still still left left what what i i thought thought a a good good deal deal of of change, change, out out of of the the second second of of the the bright bright shillings, shillings, and and made made me me consider consider london london a a very very cheap cheap place. place. these these provisions provisions laid laid in, in, we we went went on on through through a a great great noise noise and and uproar uproar that that confused confused my my weary weary head head beyond beyond description, description, and and over over a a bridge bridge which, which, no no doubt, doubt, was was london london bridge bridge (indeed (indeed i i think think he he told told me me so, so, but but i i was was half half asleep), asleep), until until we we came came to to the the poor poor person's person's house, house, which which was was a a part part of of some some alms-houses, alms-houses, as as i i knew knew by by their their look, look, and and by by an an inscription inscription on on a a stone stone over over the the gate gate which which said said they they were were established established for for twenty-five twenty-five poor poor women. women. the the master master at at salem salem house house lifted lifted the the latch latch of of one one of of a a number number of of little little black black doors doors that that were were all all alike, alike, and and had had each each a a little little diamond-paned diamond-paned window window on on one one side, side, and and another another little little diamond diamond -- -- paned paned window window above; above; and and we we went went into into the the little little house house of of one one of of these these poor poor old old women, women, who who was was blowing blowing a a fire fire to to make make a a little little saucepan saucepan boil. boil. on on seeing seeing the the master master enter, enter, the the old old woman woman stopped stopped with with the the bellows bellows on on her her knee, knee, and and said said something something that that i i thought thought sounded sounded like like 'my 'my charley!' charley!' but but on on seeing seeing me me come come in in too, too, she she got got up, up, and and rubbing rubbing her her hands hands made made a a confused confused sort sort of of half half curtsey. curtsey. 'can 'can you cook cook this this young young gentleman's gentleman's breakfast breakfast for for him, him, if if you please?' please?' said said the the master master at at salem salem house. house. 'can 'can i?' i?' said said the the old old woman. woman. 'yes 'yes can can i, i, sure!' sure!' 'how's 'how's mrs. mrs. fibbitson fibbitson today?' today?' said said the the master, master, looking looking at at another another old old woman woman in in a a large large chair chair by by the the fire, fire, who who was was such such a a bundle bundle of of clothes clothes that that i i feel feel grateful grateful to to this this hour hour for for not not having having sat sat upon upon her her by by mistake. mistake. 'ah, 'ah, she's she's poorly,' poorly,' said said the the first first old old woman. woman. 'it's 'it's one one of of her her bad bad days. days. if if the the fire fire was was to to go go out, out, through through any any accident, accident, i i verily verily believe believe she'd she'd go go out out too, too, and and never never come come to to life life again.' again.' as as they they looked looked at at her, her, i i looked looked at at her her also. also. although although it it was was a a warm warm day, day, she she seemed seemed to to think think of of nothing nothing but but the the fire. fire. i i fancied fancied she she was was jealous jealous even even of of the the saucepan saucepan on on it; it; and and i i have have reason reason to to know know that that she she took took its its impressment impressment into into the the service service of of boiling boiling my my egg egg and and broiling broiling my my bacon, bacon, in in dudgeon; dudgeon; for for i i saw saw her, her, with with my my own own discomfited discomfited eyes, eyes, shake shake her her fist fist at at me me once, once, when when those those culinary culinary operations operations were were going going on, on, and and no no one one else else was was looking. looking. the the sun sun streamed streamed in in at at the the little little window, window, but but she she sat sat with with her her own own back back and and the the back back of of the the large large chair chair towards towards it, it, screening screening the the fire fire as as if if she she were were sedulously sedulously keeping keeping it it warm, warm, instead instead of of it it keeping keeping her her warm, warm, and and watching watching it it in in a a most most distrustful distrustful manner. manner. the the completion completion of of the the preparations preparations for for my my breakfast, breakfast, by by relieving relieving the the fire, fire, gave gave her her such such extreme extreme joy joy that that she she laughed laughed aloud aloud -- -- and and a a very very unmelodious unmelodious laugh laugh she she had, had, i i must must say. say. i i sat sat down down to to my my brown brown loaf, loaf, my my egg, egg, and and my my rasher rasher of of bacon, bacon, with with a a basin basin of of milk milk besides, besides, and and made made a a most most delicious delicious meal. meal. while while i i was was yet yet in in the the full full enjoyment enjoyment of of it, it, the the old old woman woman of of the the house house said said to to the the master: master: 'have 'have you got got your your flute flute with with you?' 'yes,' 'yes,' he he returned. returned. 'have 'have a a blow blow at at it,' it,' said said the the old old woman, woman, coaxingly. coaxingly. 'do!' 'do!' the the master, master, upon upon this, this, put put his his hand hand underneath underneath the the skirts skirts of of his his coat, coat, and and brought brought out out his his flute flute in in three three pieces, pieces, which which he he screwed screwed together, together, and and began began immediately immediately to to play. play. my my impression impression is, is, after after many many years years of of consideration, consideration, that that there there never never can can have have been been anybody anybody in in the the world world who who played played worse. worse. he he made made the the most most dismal dismal sounds sounds i i have have ever ever heard heard produced produced by by any any means, means, natural natural or or artificial. artificial. i i don't don't know know what what the the tunes tunes were were -- -- if if there there were were such such things things in in the the performance performance at at all, all, which which i i doubt doubt -- -- but but the the influence influence of of the the strain strain upon upon me me was, was, first, first, to to make make me me think think of of all all my my sorrows sorrows until until i i could could hardly hardly keep keep my my tears tears back; back; then then to to take take away away my my appetite; appetite; and and lastly, lastly, to to make make me me so so sleepy sleepy that that i i couldn't couldn't keep keep my my eyes eyes open. open. they they begin begin to to close close again, again, and and i i begin begin to to nod, nod, as as the the recollection recollection rises rises fresh fresh upon upon me. me. once once more more the the little little room, room, with with its its open open corner corner cupboard, cupboard, and and its its square-backed square-backed chairs, chairs, and and its its angular angular little little staircase staircase leading leading to to the the room room above, above, and and its its three three peacock's peacock's feathers feathers displayed displayed over over the the mantelpiece mantelpiece -- -- i i remember remember wondering wondering when when i i first first went went in, in, what what that that peacock peacock would would have have thought thought if if he he had had known known what what his his finery finery was was doomed doomed to to come come to to -- -- fades fades from from before before me, me, and and i i nod, nod, and and sleep. sleep. the the flute flute becomes becomes inaudible, inaudible, the the wheels wheels of of the the coach coach are are heard heard instead, instead, and and i i am am on on my my journey. journey. the the coach coach jolts, jolts, i i wake wake with with a a start, start, and and the the flute flute has has come come back back again, again, and and the the master master at at salem salem house house is is sitting sitting with with his his legs legs crossed, crossed, playing playing it it dolefully, dolefully, while while the the old old woman woman of of the the house house looks looks on on delighted. delighted. she she fades fades in in her her turn, turn, and and he he fades, fades, and and all all fades, fades, and and there there is is no no flute, flute, no no master, master, no no salem salem house, house, no no david david copperfield, copperfield, no no anything anything but but heavy heavy sleep. sleep. i i dreamed, dreamed, i i thought, thought, that that once once while while he he was was blowing blowing into into this this dismal dismal flute, flute, the the old old woman woman of of the the house, house, who who had had gone gone nearer nearer and and nearer nearer to to him him in in her her ecstatic ecstatic admiration, admiration, leaned leaned over over the the back back of of his his chair chair and and gave gave him him an an affectionate affectionate squeeze squeeze round round the the neck, neck, which which stopped stopped his his playing playing for for a a moment. moment. i i was was in in the the middle middle state state between between sleeping sleeping and and waking, waking, either either then then or or immediately immediately afterwards; afterwards; for, for, as as he he resumed resumed -- -- it it was was a a real real fact fact that that he he had had stopped stopped playing playing -- -- i i saw saw and and heard heard the the same same old old woman woman ask ask mrs. mrs. fibbitson fibbitson if if it it wasn't wasn't delicious delicious (meaning (meaning the the flute), flute), to to which which mrs. mrs. fibbitson fibbitson replied, replied, 'ay, 'ay, ay! ay! yes!' yes!' and and nodded nodded at at the the fire: fire: to to which, which, i i am am persuaded, persuaded, she she gave gave the the credit credit of of the the whole whole performance. performance. when when i i seemed seemed to to have have been been dozing dozing a a long long while, while, the the master master at at salem salem house house unscrewed unscrewed his his flute flute into into the the three three pieces, pieces, put put them them up up as as before, before, and and took took me me away. away. we we found found the the coach coach very very near near at at hand, hand, and and got got upon upon the the roof; roof; but but i i was was so so dead dead sleepy, sleepy, that that when when we we stopped stopped on on the the road road to to take take up up somebody somebody else, else, they they put put me me inside inside where where there there were were no no passengers, passengers, and and where where i i slept slept profoundly, profoundly, until until i i found found the the coach coach going going at at a a footpace footpace up up a a steep steep hill hill among among green green leaves. leaves. presently, presently, it it stopped, stopped, and and had had come come to to its its destination. destination. a a short short walk walk brought brought us us -- -- i i mean mean the the master master and and me me -- -- to to salem salem house, house, which which was was enclosed enclosed with with a a high high brick brick wall, wall, and and looked looked very very dull. dull. over over a a door door in in this this wall wall was was a a board board with with salem salem house house upon upon it; it; and and through through a a grating grating in in this this door door we we were were surveyed surveyed when when we we rang rang the the bell bell by by a a surly surly face, face, which which i i found, found, on on the the door door being being opened, opened, belonged belonged to to a a stout stout man man with with a a bull-neck, bull-neck, a a wooden wooden leg, leg, overhanging overhanging temples, temples, and and his his hair hair cut cut close close all all round round his his head. head. 'the 'the new new boy,' boy,' said said the the master. master. the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg eyed eyed me me all all over over -- -- it it didn't didn't take take long, long, for for there there was was not not much much of of me me -- -- and and locked locked the the gate gate behind behind us, us, and and took took out out the the key. key. we we were were going going up up to to the the house, house, among among some some dark dark heavy heavy trees, trees, when when he he called called after after my my conductor. conductor. 'hallo!' 'hallo!' we we looked looked back, back, and and he he was was standing standing at at the the door door of of a a little little lodge, lodge, where where he he lived, lived, with with a a pair pair of of boots boots in in his his hand. hand. 'here! 'here! the the cobbler's cobbler's been,' been,' he he said, said, 'since 'since you've you've been been out, out, mr. mr. mell, mell, and and he he says says he he can't can't mend mend 'em 'em any any more. more. he he says says there there ain't ain't a a bit bit of of the the original original boot boot left, left, and and he he wonders wonders you expect expect it.' it.' with with these these words words he he threw threw the the boots boots towards towards mr. mr. mell, mell, who who went went back back a a few few paces paces to to pick pick them them up, up, and and looked looked at at them them (very (very disconsolately, disconsolately, i i was was afraid), afraid), as as we we went went on on together. together. i i observed observed then, then, for for the the first first time, time, that that the the boots boots he he had had on on were were a a good good deal deal the the worse worse for for wear, wear, and and that that his his stocking stocking was was just just breaking breaking out out in in one one place, place, like like a a bud. bud. salem salem house house was was a a square square brick brick building building with with wings; wings; of of a a bare bare and and unfurnished unfurnished appearance. appearance. all all about about it it was was so so very very quiet, quiet, that that i i said said to to mr. mr. mell mell i i supposed supposed the the boys boys were were out; out; but but he he seemed seemed surprised surprised at at my my not not knowing knowing that that it it was was holiday-time. holiday-time. that that all all the the boys boys were were at at their their several several homes. homes. that that mr. mr. creakle, creakle, the the proprietor, proprietor, was was down down by by the the sea-side sea-side with with mrs. mrs. and and miss miss creakle; creakle; and and that that i i was was sent sent in in holiday-time holiday-time as as a a punishment punishment for for my my misdoing, misdoing, all all of of which which he he explained explained to to me me as as we we went went along. along. i i gazed gazed upon upon the the schoolroom schoolroom into into which which he he took took me, me, as as the the most most forlorn forlorn and and desolate desolate place place i i had had ever ever seen. seen. i i see see it it now. now. a a long long room room with with three three long long rows rows of of desks, desks, and and six six of of forms, forms, and and bristling bristling all all round round with with pegs pegs for for hats hats and and slates. slates. scraps scraps of of old old copy-books copy-books and and exercises exercises litter litter the the dirty dirty floor. floor. some some silkworms' silkworms' houses, houses, made made of of the the same same materials, materials, are are scattered scattered over over the the desks. desks. two two miserable miserable little little white white mice, mice, left left behind behind by by their their owner, owner, are are running running up up and and down down in in a a fusty fusty castle castle made made of of pasteboard pasteboard and and wire, wire, looking looking in in all all the the corners corners with with their their red red eyes eyes for for anything anything to to eat. eat. a a bird, bird, in in a a cage cage very very little little bigger bigger than than himself, himself, makes makes a a mournful mournful rattle rattle now now and and then then in in hopping hopping on on his his perch, perch, two two inches inches high, high, or or dropping dropping from from it; it; but but neither neither sings sings nor nor chirps. chirps. there there is is a a strange strange unwholesome unwholesome smell smell upon upon the the room, room, like like mildewed mildewed corduroys, corduroys, sweet sweet apples apples wanting wanting air, air, and and rotten rotten books. books. there there could could not not well well be be more more ink ink splashed splashed about about it, it, if if it it had had been been roofless roofless from from its its first first construction, construction, and and the the skies skies had had rained, rained, snowed, snowed, hailed, hailed, and and blown blown ink ink through through the the varying varying seasons seasons of of the the year. year. mr. mr. mell mell having having left left me me while while he he took took his his irreparable irreparable boots boots upstairs, upstairs, i i went went softly softly to to the the upper upper end end of of the the room, room, observing observing all all this this as as i i crept crept along. along. suddenly suddenly i i came came upon upon a a pasteboard pasteboard placard, placard, beautifully beautifully written, written, which which was was lying lying on on the the desk, desk, and and bore bore these these words: words: 'take 'take care care of of him. him. he he bites.' bites.' i i got got upon upon the the desk desk immediately, immediately, apprehensive apprehensive of of at at least least a a great great dog dog underneath. underneath. but, but, though though i i looked looked all all round round with with anxious anxious eyes, eyes, i i could could see see nothing nothing of of him. him. i i was was still still engaged engaged in in peering peering about, about, when when mr. mr. mell mell came came back, back, and and asked asked me me what what i i did did up up there? there? 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir,' sir,' says says i, i, 'if 'if you please, please, i'm i'm looking looking for for the the dog.' dog.' 'dog?' 'dog?' he he says. says. 'what 'what dog?' dog?' 'isn't 'isn't it it a a dog, dog, sir?' sir?' 'isn't 'isn't what what a a dog?' dog?' 'that's 'that's to to be be taken taken care care of, of, sir; sir; that that bites.' bites.' 'no, 'no, copperfield,' copperfield,' says says he, he, gravely, gravely, 'that's 'that's not not a a dog. dog. that's that's a a boy. boy. my my instructions instructions are, are, copperfield, copperfield, to to put put this this placard placard on on your your back. back. i i am am sorry sorry to to make make such such a a beginning beginning with with you, but but i i must must do do it.' it.' with with that that he he took took me me down, down, and and tied tied the the placard, placard, which which was was neatly neatly constructed constructed for for the the purpose, purpose, on on my my shoulders shoulders like like a a knapsack; knapsack; and and wherever wherever i i went, went, afterwards, afterwards, i i had had the the consolation consolation of of carrying carrying it. it. what what i i suffered suffered from from that that placard, placard, nobody nobody can can imagine. imagine. whether whether it it was was possible possible for for people people to to see see me me or or not, not, i i always always fancied fancied that that somebody somebody was was reading reading it. it. it it was was no no relief relief to to turn turn round round and and find find nobody; nobody; for for wherever wherever my my back back was, was, there there i i imagined imagined somebody somebody always always to to be. be. that that cruel cruel man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg aggravated aggravated my my sufferings. sufferings. he he was was in in authority; authority; and and if if he he ever ever saw saw me me leaning leaning against against a a tree, tree, or or a a wall, wall, or or the the house, house, he he roared roared out out from from his his lodge lodge door door in in a a stupendous stupendous voice, voice, 'hallo, 'hallo, you sir! sir! you copperfield! copperfield! show show that that badge badge conspicuous, conspicuous, or or i'll i'll report report you!' the the playground playground was was a a bare bare gravelled gravelled yard, yard, open open to to all all the the back back of of the the house house and and the the offices; offices; and and i i knew knew that that the the servants servants read read it, it, and and the the butcher butcher read read it, it, and and the the baker baker read read it; it; that that everybody, everybody, in in a a word, word, who who came came backwards backwards and and forwards forwards to to the the house, house, of of a a morning morning when when i i was was ordered ordered to to walk walk there, there, read read that that i i was was to to be be taken taken care care of, of, for for i i bit, bit, i i recollect recollect that that i i positively positively began began to to have have a a dread dread of of myself, myself, as as a a kind kind of of wild wild boy boy who who did did bite. bite. there there was was an an old old door door in in this this playground, playground, on on which which the the boys boys had had a a custom custom of of carving carving their their names. names. it it was was completely completely covered covered with with such such inscriptions. inscriptions. in in my my dread dread of of the the end end of of the the vacation vacation and and their their coming coming back, back, i i could could not not read read a a boy's boy's name, name, without without inquiring inquiring in in what what tone tone and and with with what what emphasis emphasis he he would would read, read, 'take 'take care care of of him. him. he he bites.' bites.' there there was was one one boy boy -- -- a a certain certain j. j. steerforth steerforth -- -- who who cut cut his his name name very very deep deep and and very very often, often, who, who, i i conceived, conceived, would would read read it it in in a a rather rather strong strong voice, voice, and and afterwards afterwards pull pull my my hair. hair. there there was was another another boy, boy, one one tommy tommy traddles, traddles, who who i i dreaded dreaded would would make make game game of of it, it, and and pretend pretend to to be be dreadfully dreadfully frightened frightened of of me. me. there there was was a a third, third, george george demple, demple, who who i i fancied fancied would would sing sing it. it. i i have have looked, looked, a a little little shrinking shrinking creature, creature, at at that that door, door, until until the the owners owners of of all all the the names names -- -- there there were were five-and-forty five-and-forty of of them them in in the the school school then, then, mr. mr. mell mell said said -- -- seemed seemed to to send send me me to to coventry coventry by by general general acclamation, acclamation, and and to to cry cry out, out, each each in in his his own own way, way, 'take 'take care care of of him. him. he he bites!' bites!' it it was was the the same same with with the the places places at at the the desks desks and and forms. forms. it it was was the the same same with with the the groves groves of of deserted deserted bedsteads bedsteads i i peeped peeped at, at, on on my my way way to, to, and and when when i i was was in, in, my my own own bed. bed. i i remember remember dreaming dreaming night night after after night, night, of of being being with with my my mother mother as as she she used used to to be, be, or or of of going going to to a a party party at at mr. mr. peggotty's, peggotty's, or or of of travelling travelling outside outside the the stage-coach, stage-coach, or or of of dining dining again again with with my my unfortunate unfortunate friend friend the the waiter, waiter, and and in in all all these these circumstances circumstances making making people people scream scream and and stare, stare, by by the the unhappy unhappy disclosure disclosure that that i i had had nothing nothing on on but but my my little little night-shirt, night-shirt, and and that that placard. placard. in in the the monotony monotony of of my my life, life, and and in in my my constant constant apprehension apprehension of of the the re-opening re-opening of of the the school, school, it it was was such such an an insupportable insupportable affliction! affliction! i i had had long long tasks tasks every every day day to to do do with with mr. mr. mell; mell; but but i i did did them, them, there there being being no no mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone here, here, and and got got through through them them without without disgrace. disgrace. before, before, and and after after them, them, i i walked walked about about -- -- supervised, supervised, as as i i have have mentioned, mentioned, by by the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg. leg. how how vividly vividly i i call call to to mind mind the the damp damp about about the the house, house, the the green green cracked cracked flagstones flagstones in in the the court, court, an an old old leaky leaky water-butt, water-butt, and and the the discoloured discoloured trunks trunks of of some some of of the the grim grim trees, trees, which which seemed seemed to to have have dripped dripped more more in in the the rain rain than than other other trees, trees, and and to to have have blown blown less less in in the the sun! sun! at at one one we we dined, dined, mr. mr. mell mell and and i, i, at at the the upper upper end end of of a a long long bare bare dining-room, dining-room, full full of of deal deal tables, tables, and and smelling smelling of of fat. fat. then, then, we we had had more more tasks tasks until until tea, tea, which which mr. mr. mell mell drank drank out out of of a a blue blue teacup, teacup, and and i i out out of of a a tin tin pot. pot. all all day day long, long, and and until until seven seven or or eight eight in in the the evening, evening, mr. mr. mell, mell, at at his his own own detached detached desk desk in in the the schoolroom, schoolroom, worked worked hard hard with with pen, pen, ink, ink, ruler, ruler, books, books, and and writing-paper, writing-paper, making making out out the the bills bills (as (as i i found) found) for for last last half-year. half-year. when when he he had had put put up up his his things things for for the the night night he he took took out out his his flute, flute, and and blew blew at at it, it, until until i i almost almost thought thought he he would would gradually gradually blow blow his his whole whole being being into into the the large large hole hole at at the the top, top, and and ooze ooze away away at at the the keys. keys. i i picture picture my my small small self self in in the the dimly-lighted dimly-lighted rooms, rooms, sitting sitting with with my my head head upon upon my my hand, hand, listening listening to to the the doleful doleful performance performance of of mr. mr. mell, mell, and and conning conning tomorrow's tomorrow's lessons. lessons. i i picture picture myself myself with with my my books books shut shut up, up, still still listening listening to to the the doleful doleful performance performance of of mr. mr. mell, mell, and and listening listening through through it it to to what what used used to to be be at at home, home, and and to to the the blowing blowing of of the the wind wind on on yarmouth yarmouth flats, flats, and and feeling feeling very very sad sad and and solitary. solitary. i i picture picture myself myself going going up up to to bed, bed, among among the the unused unused rooms, rooms, and and sitting sitting on on my my bed-side bed-side crying crying for for a a comfortable comfortable word word from from peggotty. peggotty. i i picture picture myself myself coming coming downstairs downstairs in in the the morning, morning, and and looking looking through through a a long long ghastly ghastly gash gash of of a a staircase staircase window window at at the the school-bell school-bell hanging hanging on on the the top top of of an an out-house out-house with with a a weathercock weathercock above above it; it; and and dreading dreading the the time time when when it it shall shall ring ring j. j. steerforth steerforth and and the the rest rest to to work: work: which which is is only only second, second, in in my my foreboding foreboding apprehensions, apprehensions, to to the the time time when when the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg shall shall unlock unlock the the rusty rusty gate gate to to give give admission admission to to the the awful awful mr. mr. creakle. creakle. i i cannot cannot think think i i was was a a very very dangerous dangerous character character in in any any of of these these aspects, aspects, but but in in all all of of them them i i carried carried the the same same warning warning on on my my back. back. mr. mr. mell mell never never said said much much to to me, me, but but he he was was never never harsh harsh to to me. me. i i suppose suppose we we were were company company to to each each other, other, without without talking. talking. i i forgot forgot to to mention mention that that he he would would talk talk to to himself himself sometimes, sometimes, and and grin, grin, and and clench clench his his fist, fist, and and grind grind his his teeth, teeth, and and pull pull his his hair hair in in an an unaccountable unaccountable manner. manner. but but he he had had these these peculiarities: peculiarities: and and at at first first they they frightened frightened me, me, though though i i soon soon got got used used to to them. them. chapter chapter 6. 6. i i enlarge enlarge my my circle circle of of acquaintance acquaintance i i had had led led this this life life about about a a month, month, when when the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg began began to to stump stump about about with with a a mop mop and and a a bucket bucket of of water, water, from from which which i i inferred inferred that that preparations preparations were were making making to to receive receive mr. mr. creakle creakle and and the the boys. boys. i i was was not not mistaken; mistaken; for for the the mop mop came came into into the the schoolroom schoolroom before before long, long, and and turned turned out out mr. mr. mell mell and and me, me, who who lived lived where where we we could, could, and and got got on on how how we we could, could, for for some some days, days, during during which which we we were were always always in in the the way way of of two two or or three three young young women, women, who who had had rarely rarely shown shown themselves themselves before, before, and and were were so so continually continually in in the the midst midst of of dust dust that that i i sneezed sneezed almost almost as as much much as as if if salem salem house house had had been been a a great great snuff-box. snuff-box. one one day day i i was was informed informed by by mr. mr. mell mell that that mr. mr. creakle creakle would would be be home home that that evening. evening. in in the the evening, evening, after after tea, tea, i i heard heard that that he he was was come. come. before before bedtime, bedtime, i i was was fetched fetched by by the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg to to appear appear before before him. him. mr. mr. creakle's creakle's part part of of the the house house was was a a good good deal deal more more comfortable comfortable than than ours, ours, and and he he had had a a snug snug bit bit of of garden garden that that looked looked pleasant pleasant after after the the dusty dusty playground, playground, which which was was such such a a desert desert in in miniature, miniature, that that i i thought thought no no one one but but a a camel, camel, or or a a dromedary, dromedary, could could have have felt felt at at home home in in it. it. it it seemed seemed to to me me a a bold bold thing thing even even to to take take notice notice that that the the passage passage looked looked comfortable, comfortable, as as i i went went on on my my way, way, trembling, trembling, to to mr. mr. creakle's creakle's presence: presence: which which so so abashed abashed me, me, when when i i was was ushered ushered into into it, it, that that i i hardly hardly saw saw mrs. mrs. creakle creakle or or miss miss creakle creakle (who (who were were both both there, there, in in the the parlour), parlour), or or anything anything but but mr. mr. creakle, creakle, a a stout stout gentleman gentleman with with a a bunch bunch of of watch-chain watch-chain and and seals, seals, in in an an arm-chair, arm-chair, with with a a tumbler tumbler and and bottle bottle beside beside him. him. 'so!' 'so!' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'this 'this is is the the young young gentleman gentleman whose whose teeth teeth are are to to be be filed! filed! turn turn him him round.' round.' the the wooden-legged wooden-legged man man turned turned me me about about so so as as to to exhibit exhibit the the placard; placard; and and having having afforded afforded time time for for a a full full survey survey of of it, it, turned turned me me about about again, again, with with my my face face to to mr. mr. creakle, creakle, and and posted posted himself himself at at mr. mr. creakle's creakle's side. side. mr. mr. creakle's creakle's face face was was fiery, fiery, and and his his eyes eyes were were small, small, and and deep deep in in his his head; head; he he had had thick thick veins veins in in his his forehead, forehead, a a little little nose, nose, and and a a large large chin. chin. he he was was bald bald on on the the top top of of his his head; head; and and had had some some thin thin wet-looking wet-looking hair hair that that was was just just turning turning grey, grey, brushed brushed across across each each temple, temple, so so that that the the two two sides sides interlaced interlaced on on his his forehead. forehead. but but the the circumstance circumstance about about him him which which impressed impressed me me most, most, was, was, that that he he had had no no voice, voice, but but spoke spoke in in a a whisper. whisper. the the exertion exertion this this cost cost him, him, or or the the consciousness consciousness of of talking talking in in that that feeble feeble way, way, made made his his angry angry face face so so much much more more angry, angry, and and his his thick thick veins veins so so much much thicker, thicker, when when he he spoke, spoke, that that i i am am not not surprised, surprised, on on looking looking back, back, at at this this peculiarity peculiarity striking striking me me as as his his chief chief one. one. 'now,' 'now,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'what's 'what's the the report report of of this this boy?' boy?' 'there's 'there's nothing nothing against against him him yet,' yet,' returned returned the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg. leg. 'there 'there has has been been no no opportunity.' opportunity.' i i thought thought mr. mr. creakle creakle was was disappointed. disappointed. i i thought thought mrs. mrs. and and miss miss creakle creakle (at (at whom whom i i now now glanced glanced for for the the first first time, time, and and who who were, were, both, both, thin thin and and quiet) quiet) were were not not disappointed. disappointed. 'come 'come here, here, sir!' sir!' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, beckoning beckoning to to me. me. 'come 'come here!' here!' said said the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg, leg, repeating repeating the the gesture. gesture. 'i 'i have have the the happiness happiness of of knowing knowing your your father-in-law,' father-in-law,' whispered whispered mr. mr. creakle, creakle, taking taking me me by by the the ear; ear; 'and 'and a a worthy worthy man man he he is, is, and and a a man man of of a a strong strong character. character. he he knows knows me, me, and and i i know know him. him. do do you know know me? me? hey?' hey?' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, pinching pinching my my ear ear with with ferocious ferocious playfulness. playfulness. 'not 'not yet, yet, sir,' sir,' i i said, said, flinching flinching with with the the pain. pain. 'not 'not yet? yet? hey?' hey?' repeated repeated mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'but 'but you will will soon. soon. hey?' hey?' 'you will will soon. soon. hey?' hey?' repeated repeated the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg. leg. i i afterwards afterwards found found that that he he generally generally acted, acted, with with his his strong strong voice, voice, as as mr. mr. creakle's creakle's interpreter interpreter to to the the boys. boys. i i was was very very much much frightened, frightened, and and said, said, i i hoped hoped so, so, if if he he pleased. pleased. i i felt, felt, all all this this while, while, as as if if my my ear ear were were blazing; blazing; he he pinched pinched it it so so hard. hard. 'i'll 'i'll tell tell you what what i i am,' am,' whispered whispered mr. mr. creakle, creakle, letting letting it it go go at at last, last, with with a a screw screw at at parting parting that that brought brought the the water water into into my my eyes. eyes. 'i'm 'i'm a a tartar.' tartar.' 'a 'a tartar,' tartar,' said said the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg. leg. 'when 'when i i say say i'll i'll do do a a thing, thing, i i do do it,' it,' said said mr. mr. creakle; creakle; 'and 'and when when i i say say i i will will have have a a thing thing done, done, i i will will have have it it done.' done.' ' ' -- -- will will have have a a thing thing done, done, i i will will have have it it done,' done,' repeated repeated the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg. leg. 'i 'i am am a a determined determined character,' character,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'that's 'that's what what i i am. am. i i do do my my duty. duty. that's that's what what i i do. do. my my flesh flesh and and blood' blood' -- -- he he looked looked at at mrs. mrs. creakle creakle as as he he said said this this -- -- 'when 'when it it rises rises against against me, me, is is not not my my flesh flesh and and blood. blood. i i discard discard it. it. has has that that fellow' fellow' -- -- to to the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg leg -- -- 'been 'been here here again?' again?' 'no,' 'no,' was was the the answer. answer. 'no,' 'no,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'he 'he knows knows better. better. he he knows knows me. me. let let him him keep keep away. away. i i say say let let him him keep keep away,' away,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, striking striking his his hand hand upon upon the the table, table, and and looking looking at at mrs. mrs. creakle, creakle, 'for 'for he he knows knows me. me. now now you have have begun begun to to know know me me too, too, my my young young friend, friend, and and you may may go. go. take take him him away.' away.' i i was was very very glad glad to to be be ordered ordered away, away, for for mrs. mrs. and and miss miss creakle creakle were were both both wiping wiping their their eyes, eyes, and and i i felt felt as as uncomfortable uncomfortable for for them them as as i i did did for for myself. myself. but but i i had had a a petition petition on on my my mind mind which which concerned concerned me me so so nearly, nearly, that that i i couldn't couldn't help help saying, saying, though though i i wondered wondered at at my my own own courage: courage: 'if 'if you please, please, sir sir -- -- ' ' mr. mr. creakle creakle whispered, whispered, 'hah! 'hah! what's what's this?' this?' and and bent bent his his eyes eyes upon upon me, me, as as if if he he would would have have burnt burnt me me up up with with them. them. 'if 'if you please, please, sir,' sir,' i i faltered, faltered, 'if 'if i i might might be be allowed allowed (i (i am am very very sorry sorry indeed, indeed, sir, sir, for for what what i i did) did) to to take take this this writing writing off, off, before before the the boys boys come come back back -- -- ' ' whether whether mr. mr. creakle creakle was was in in earnest, earnest, or or whether whether he he only only did did it it to to frighten frighten me, me, i i don't don't know, know, but but he he made made a a burst burst out out of of his his chair, chair, before before which which i i precipitately precipitately retreated, retreated, without without waiting waiting for for the the escort escort of of the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg, leg, and and never never once once stopped stopped until until i i reached reached my my own own bedroom, bedroom, where, where, finding finding i i was was not not pursued, pursued, i i went went to to bed, bed, as as it it was was time, time, and and lay lay quaking, quaking, for for a a couple couple of of hours. hours. next next morning morning mr. mr. sharp sharp came came back. back. mr. mr. sharp sharp was was the the first first master, master, and and superior superior to to mr. mr. mell. mell. mr. mr. mell mell took took his his meals meals with with the the boys, boys, but but mr. mr. sharp sharp dined dined and and supped supped at at mr. mr. creakle's creakle's table. table. he he was was a a limp, limp, delicate-looking delicate-looking gentleman, gentleman, i i thought, thought, with with a a good good deal deal of of nose, nose, and and a a way way of of carrying carrying his his head head on on one one side, side, as as if if it it were were a a little little too too heavy heavy for for him. him. his his hair hair was was very very smooth smooth and and wavy; wavy; but but i i was was informed informed by by the the very very first first boy boy who who came came back back that that it it was was a a wig wig (a (a second-hand second-hand one one he he said), said), and and that that mr. mr. sharp sharp went went out out every every saturday saturday afternoon afternoon to to get get it it curled. curled. it it was was no no other other than than tommy tommy traddles traddles who who gave gave me me this this piece piece of of intelligence. intelligence. he he was was the the first first boy boy who who returned. returned. he he introduced introduced himself himself by by informing informing me me that that i i should should find find his his name name on on the the right-hand right-hand corner corner of of the the gate, gate, over over the the top-bolt; top-bolt; upon upon that that i i said, said, 'traddles?' 'traddles?' to to which which he he replied, replied, 'the 'the same,' same,' and and then then he he asked asked me me for for a a full full account account of of myself myself and and family. family. it it was was a a happy happy circumstance circumstance for for me me that that traddles traddles came came back back first. first. he he enjoyed enjoyed my my placard placard so so much, much, that that he he saved saved me me from from the the embarrassment embarrassment of of either either disclosure disclosure or or concealment, concealment, by by presenting presenting me me to to every every other other boy boy who who came came back, back, great great or or small, small, immediately immediately on on his his arrival, arrival, in in this this form form of of introduction, introduction, 'look 'look here! here! here's here's a a game!' game!' happily, happily, too, too, the the greater greater part part of of the the boys boys came came back back low-spirited, low-spirited, and and were were not not so so boisterous boisterous at at my my expense expense as as i i had had expected. expected. some some of of them them certainly certainly did did dance dance about about me me like like wild wild indians, indians, and and the the greater greater part part could could not not resist resist the the temptation temptation of of pretending pretending that that i i was was a a dog, dog, and and patting patting and and soothing soothing me, me, lest lest i i should should bite, bite, and and saying, saying, 'lie 'lie down, down, sir!' sir!' and and calling calling me me towzer. towzer. this this was was naturally naturally confusing, confusing, among among so so many many strangers, strangers, and and cost cost me me some some tears, tears, but but on on the the whole whole it it was was much much better better than than i i had had anticipated. anticipated. i i was was not not considered considered as as being being formally formally received received into into the the school, school, however, however, until until j. j. steerforth steerforth arrived. arrived. before before this this boy, boy, who who was was reputed reputed to to be be a a great great scholar, scholar, and and was was very very good-looking, good-looking, and and at at least least half-a-dozen half-a-dozen years years my my senior, senior, i i was was carried carried as as before before a a magistrate. magistrate. he he inquired, inquired, under under a a shed shed in in the the playground, playground, into into the the particulars particulars of of my my punishment, punishment, and and was was pleased pleased to to express express his his opinion opinion that that it it was was 'a 'a jolly jolly shame'; shame'; for for which which i i became became bound bound to to him him ever ever afterwards. afterwards. 'what 'what money money have have you got, got, copperfield?' copperfield?' he he said, said, walking walking aside aside with with me me when when he he had had disposed disposed of of my my affair affair in in these these terms. terms. i i told told him him seven seven shillings. shillings. 'you had had better better give give it it to to me me to to take take care care of,' of,' he he said. said. 'at 'at least, least, you can can if if you like. like. you needn't needn't if if you don't don't like.' like.' i i hastened hastened to to comply comply with with his his friendly friendly suggestion, suggestion, and and opening opening peggotty's peggotty's purse, purse, turned turned it it upside upside down down into into his his hand. hand. 'do 'do you want want to to spend spend anything anything now?' now?' he he asked asked me. me. 'no 'no thank thank you,' i i replied. replied. 'you can, can, if if you like, like, you know,' know,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'say 'say the the word.' word.' 'no, 'no, thank thank you, sir,' sir,' i i repeated. repeated. 'perhaps 'perhaps you'd you'd like like to to spend spend a a couple couple of of shillings shillings or or so, so, in in a a bottle bottle of of currant currant wine wine by by and and by, by, up up in in the the bedroom?' bedroom?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'you belong belong to to my my bedroom, bedroom, i i find.' find.' it it certainly certainly had had not not occurred occurred to to me me before, before, but but i i said, said, yes, yes, i i should should like like that. that. 'very 'very good,' good,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'you'll 'you'll be be glad glad to to spend spend another another shilling shilling or or so, so, in in almond almond cakes, cakes, i i dare dare say?' say?' i i said, said, yes, yes, i i should should like like that, that, too. too. 'and 'and another another shilling shilling or or so so in in biscuits, biscuits, and and another another in in fruit, fruit, eh?' eh?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i say, say, young young copperfield, copperfield, you're you're going going it!' it!' i i smiled smiled because because he he smiled, smiled, but but i i was was a a little little troubled troubled in in my my mind, mind, too. too. 'well!' 'well!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'we 'we must must make make it it stretch stretch as as far far as as we we can; can; that's that's all. all. i'll i'll do do the the best best in in my my power power for for you. i i can can go go out out when when i i like, like, and and i'll i'll smuggle smuggle the the prog prog in.' in.' with with these these words words he he put put the the money money in in his his pocket, pocket, and and kindly kindly told told me me not not to to make make myself myself uneasy; uneasy; he he would would take take care care it it should should be be all all right. right. he he was was as as good good as as his his word, word, if if that that were were all all right right which which i i had had a a secret secret misgiving misgiving was was nearly nearly all all wrong wrong -- -- for for i i feared feared it it was was a a waste waste of of my my mother's mother's two two half-crowns half-crowns -- -- though though i i had had preserved preserved the the piece piece of of paper paper they they were were wrapped wrapped in: in: which which was was a a precious precious saving. saving. when when we we went went upstairs upstairs to to bed, bed, he he produced produced the the whole whole seven seven shillings' shillings' worth, worth, and and laid laid it it out out on on my my bed bed in in the the moonlight, moonlight, saying: saying: 'there 'there you are, are, young young copperfield, copperfield, and and a a royal royal spread spread you've you've got.' got.' i i couldn't couldn't think think of of doing doing the the honours honours of of the the feast, feast, at at my my time time of of life, life, while while he he was was by; by; my my hand hand shook shook at at the the very very thought thought of of it. it. i i begged begged him him to to do do me me the the favour favour of of presiding; presiding; and and my my request request being being seconded seconded by by the the other other boys boys who who were were in in that that room, room, he he acceded acceded to to it, it, and and sat sat upon upon my my pillow, pillow, handing handing round round the the viands viands -- -- with with perfect perfect fairness, fairness, i i must must say say -- -- and and dispensing dispensing the the currant currant wine wine in in a a little little glass glass without without a a foot, foot, which which was was his his own own property. property. as as to to me, me, i i sat sat on on his his left left hand, hand, and and the the rest rest were were grouped grouped about about us, us, on on the the nearest nearest beds beds and and on on the the floor. floor. how how well well i i recollect recollect our our sitting sitting there, there, talking talking in in whispers; whispers; or or their their talking, talking, and and my my respectfully respectfully listening, listening, i i ought ought rather rather to to say; say; the the moonlight moonlight falling falling a a little little way way into into the the room, room, through through the the window, window, painting painting a a pale pale window window on on the the floor, floor, and and the the greater greater part part of of us us in in shadow, shadow, except except when when steerforth steerforth dipped dipped a a match match into into a a phosphorus-box, phosphorus-box, when when he he wanted wanted to to look look for for anything anything on on the the board, board, and and shed shed a a blue blue glare glare over over us us that that was was gone gone directly! directly! a a certain certain mysterious mysterious feeling, feeling, consequent consequent on on the the darkness, darkness, the the secrecy secrecy of of the the revel, revel, and and the the whisper whisper in in which which everything everything was was said, said, steals steals over over me me again, again, and and i i listen listen to to all all they they tell tell me me with with a a vague vague feeling feeling of of solemnity solemnity and and awe, awe, which which makes makes me me glad glad that that they they are are all all so so near, near, and and frightens frightens me me (though (though i i feign feign to to laugh) laugh) when when traddles traddles pretends pretends to to see see a a ghost ghost in in the the corner. corner. i i heard heard all all kinds kinds of of things things about about the the school school and and all all belonging belonging to to it. it. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. creakle creakle had had not not preferred preferred his his claim claim to to being being a a tartar tartar without without reason; reason; that that he he was was the the sternest sternest and and most most severe severe of of masters; masters; that that he he laid laid about about him, him, right right and and left, left, every every day day of of his his life, life, charging charging in in among among the the boys boys like like a a trooper, trooper, and and slashing slashing away, away, unmercifully. unmercifully. that that he he knew knew nothing nothing himself, himself, but but the the art art of of slashing, slashing, being being more more ignorant ignorant (j. (j. steerforth steerforth said) said) than than the the lowest lowest boy boy in in the the school; school; that that he he had had been, been, a a good good many many years years ago, ago, a a small small hop-dealer hop-dealer in in the the borough, borough, and and had had taken taken to to the the schooling schooling business business after after being being bankrupt bankrupt in in hops, hops, and and making making away away with with mrs. mrs. creakle's creakle's money. money. with with a a good good deal deal more more of of that that sort, sort, which which i i wondered wondered how how they they knew. knew. i i heard heard that that the the man man with with the the wooden wooden leg, leg, whose whose name name was was tungay, tungay, was was an an obstinate obstinate barbarian barbarian who who had had formerly formerly assisted assisted in in the the hop hop business, business, but but had had come come into into the the scholastic scholastic line line with with mr. mr. creakle, creakle, in in consequence, consequence, as as was was supposed supposed among among the the boys, boys, of of his his having having broken broken his his leg leg in in mr. mr. creakle's creakle's service, service, and and having having done done a a deal deal of of dishonest dishonest work work for for him, him, and and knowing knowing his his secrets. secrets. i i heard heard that that with with the the single single exception exception of of mr. mr. creakle, creakle, tungay tungay considered considered the the whole whole establishment, establishment, masters masters and and boys, boys, as as his his natural natural enemies, enemies, and and that that the the only only delight delight of of his his life life was was to to be be sour sour and and malicious. malicious. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. creakle creakle had had a a son, son, who who had had not not been been tungay's tungay's friend, friend, and and who, who, assisting assisting in in the the school, school, had had once once held held some some remonstrance remonstrance with with his his father father on on an an occasion occasion when when its its discipline discipline was was very very cruelly cruelly exercised, exercised, and and was was supposed, supposed, besides, besides, to to have have protested protested against against his his father's father's usage usage of of his his mother. mother. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. creakle creakle had had turned turned him him out out of of doors, doors, in in consequence; consequence; and and that that mrs. mrs. and and miss miss creakle creakle had had been been in in a a sad sad way, way, ever ever since. since. but but the the greatest greatest wonder wonder that that i i heard heard of of mr. mr. creakle creakle was, was, there there being being one one boy boy in in the the school school on on whom whom he he never never ventured ventured to to lay lay a a hand, hand, and and that that boy boy being being j. j. steerforth. steerforth. steerforth steerforth himself himself confirmed confirmed this this when when it it was was stated, stated, and and said said that that he he should should like like to to begin begin to to see see him him do do it. it. on on being being asked asked by by a a mild mild boy boy (not (not me) me) how how he he would would proceed proceed if if he he did did begin begin to to see see him him do do it, it, he he dipped dipped a a match match into into his his phosphorus-box phosphorus-box on on purpose purpose to to shed shed a a glare glare over over his his reply, reply, and and said said he he would would commence commence by by knocking knocking him him down down with with a a blow blow on on the the forehead forehead from from the the seven-and-sixpenny seven-and-sixpenny ink-bottle ink-bottle that that was was always always on on the the mantelpiece. mantelpiece. we we sat sat in in the the dark dark for for some some time, time, breathless. breathless. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. sharp sharp and and mr. mr. mell mell were were both both supposed supposed to to be be wretchedly wretchedly paid; paid; and and that that when when there there was was hot hot and and cold cold meat meat for for dinner dinner at at mr. mr. creakle's creakle's table, table, mr. mr. sharp sharp was was always always expected expected to to say say he he preferred preferred cold; cold; which which was was again again corroborated corroborated by by j. j. steerforth, steerforth, the the only only parlour-boarder. parlour-boarder. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. sharp's sharp's wig wig didn't didn't fit fit him; him; and and that that he he needn't needn't be be so so 'bounceable' 'bounceable' -- -- somebody somebody else else said said 'bumptious' 'bumptious' -- -- about about it, it, because because his his own own red red hair hair was was very very plainly plainly to to be be seen seen behind. behind. i i heard heard that that one one boy, boy, who who was was a a coal-merchant's coal-merchant's son, son, came came as as a a set-off set-off against against the the coal-bill, coal-bill, and and was was called, called, on on that that account, account, 'exchange 'exchange or or barter' barter' -- -- a a name name selected selected from from the the arithmetic arithmetic book book as as expressing expressing this this arrangement. arrangement. i i heard heard that that the the table table beer beer was was a a robbery robbery of of parents, parents, and and the the pudding pudding an an imposition. imposition. i i heard heard that that miss miss creakle creakle was was regarded regarded by by the the school school in in general general as as being being in in love love with with steerforth; steerforth; and and i i am am sure, sure, as as i i sat sat in in the the dark, dark, thinking thinking of of his his nice nice voice, voice, and and his his fine fine face, face, and and his his easy easy manner, manner, and and his his curling curling hair, hair, i i thought thought it it very very likely. likely. i i heard heard that that mr. mr. mell mell was was not not a a bad bad sort sort of of fellow, fellow, but but hadn't hadn't a a sixpence sixpence to to bless bless himself himself with; with; and and that that there there was was no no doubt doubt that that old old mrs. mrs. mell, mell, his his mother, mother, was was as as poor poor as as job. job. i i thought thought of of my my breakfast breakfast then, then, and and what what had had sounded sounded like like 'my 'my charley!' charley!' but but i i was, was, i i am am glad glad to to remember, remember, as as mute mute as as a a mouse mouse about about it. it. the the hearing hearing of of all all this, this, and and a a good good deal deal more, more, outlasted outlasted the the banquet banquet some some time. time. the the greater greater part part of of the the guests guests had had gone gone to to bed bed as as soon soon as as the the eating eating and and drinking drinking were were over; over; and and we, we, who who had had remained remained whispering whispering and and listening listening half-undressed, half-undressed, at at last last betook betook ourselves ourselves to to bed, bed, too. too. 'good 'good night, night, young young copperfield,' copperfield,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i'll 'i'll take take care care of of you.' 'you're 'you're very very kind,' kind,' i i gratefully gratefully returned. returned. 'i 'i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you.' 'you haven't haven't got got a a sister, sister, have have you?' said said steerforth, steerforth, yawning. yawning. 'no,' 'no,' i i answered. answered. 'that's 'that's a a pity,' pity,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'if 'if you had had had had one, one, i i should should think think she she would would have have been been a a pretty, pretty, timid, timid, little, little, bright-eyed bright-eyed sort sort of of girl. girl. i i should should have have liked liked to to know know her. her. good good night, night, young young copperfield.' copperfield.' 'good 'good night, night, sir,' sir,' i i replied. replied. i i thought thought of of him him very very much much after after i i went went to to bed, bed, and and raised raised myself, myself, i i recollect, recollect, to to look look at at him him where where he he lay lay in in the the moonlight, moonlight, with with his his handsome handsome face face turned turned up, up, and and his his head head reclining reclining easily easily on on his his arm. arm. he he was was a a person person of of great great power power in in my my eyes; eyes; that that was, was, of of course, course, the the reason reason of of my my mind mind running running on on him. him. no no veiled veiled future future dimly dimly glanced glanced upon upon him him in in the the moonbeams. moonbeams. there there was was no no shadowy shadowy picture picture of of his his footsteps, footsteps, in in the the garden garden that that i i dreamed dreamed of of walking walking in in all all night. night. chapter chapter 7. 7. my my 'first 'first half' half' at at salem salem house house school school began began in in earnest earnest next next day. day. a a profound profound impression impression was was made made upon upon me, me, i i remember, remember, by by the the roar roar of of voices voices in in the the schoolroom schoolroom suddenly suddenly becoming becoming hushed hushed as as death death when when mr. mr. creakle creakle entered entered after after breakfast, breakfast, and and stood stood in in the the doorway doorway looking looking round round upon upon us us like like a a giant giant in in a a story-book story-book surveying surveying his his captives. captives. tungay tungay stood stood at at mr. mr. creakle's creakle's elbow. elbow. he he had had no no occasion, occasion, i i thought, thought, to to cry cry out out 'silence!' 'silence!' so so ferociously, ferociously, for for the the boys boys were were all all struck struck speechless speechless and and motionless. motionless. mr. mr. creakle creakle was was seen seen to to speak, speak, and and tungay tungay was was heard, heard, to to this this effect. effect. 'now, 'now, boys, boys, this this is is a a new new half. half. take take care care what what you're you're about, about, in in this this new new half. half. come come fresh fresh up up to to the the lessons, lessons, i i advise advise you, for for i i come come fresh fresh up up to to the the punishment. punishment. i i won't won't flinch. flinch. it it will will be be of of no no use use your your rubbing rubbing yourselves; yourselves; you won't won't rub rub the the marks marks out out that that i i shall shall give give you. now now get get to to work, work, every every boy!' boy!' when when this this dreadful dreadful exordium exordium was was over, over, and and tungay tungay had had stumped stumped out out again, again, mr. mr. creakle creakle came came to to where where i i sat, sat, and and told told me me that that if if i i were were famous famous for for biting, biting, he he was was famous famous for for biting, biting, too. too. he he then then showed showed me me the the cane, cane, and and asked asked me me what what i i thought thought of of that, that, for for a a tooth? tooth? was was it it a a sharp sharp tooth, tooth, hey? hey? was was it it a a double double tooth, tooth, hey? hey? had had it it a a deep deep prong, prong, hey? hey? did did it it bite, bite, hey? hey? did did it it bite? bite? at at every every question question he he gave gave me me a a fleshy fleshy cut cut with with it it that that made made me me writhe; writhe; so so i i was was very very soon soon made made free free of of salem salem house house (as (as steerforth steerforth said), said), and and was was very very soon soon in in tears tears also. also. not not that that i i mean mean to to say say these these were were special special marks marks of of distinction, distinction, which which only only i i received. received. on on the the contrary, contrary, a a large large majority majority of of the the boys boys (especially (especially the the smaller smaller ones) ones) were were visited visited with with similar similar instances instances of of notice, notice, as as mr. mr. creakle creakle made made the the round round of of the the schoolroom. schoolroom. half half the the establishment establishment was was writhing writhing and and crying, crying, before before the the day's day's work work began; began; and and how how much much of of it it had had writhed writhed and and cried cried before before the the day's day's work work was was over, over, i i am am really really afraid afraid to to recollect, recollect, lest lest i i should should seem seem to to exaggerate. exaggerate. i i should should think think there there never never can can have have been been a a man man who who enjoyed enjoyed his his profession profession more more than than mr. mr. creakle creakle did. did. he he had had a a delight delight in in cutting cutting at at the the boys, boys, which which was was like like the the satisfaction satisfaction of of a a craving craving appetite. appetite. i i am am confident confident that that he he couldn't couldn't resist resist a a chubby chubby boy, boy, especially; especially; that that there there was was a a fascination fascination in in such such a a subject, subject, which which made made him him restless restless in in his his mind, mind, until until he he had had scored scored and and marked marked him him for for the the day. day. i i was was chubby chubby myself, myself, and and ought ought to to know. know. i i am am sure sure when when i i think think of of the the fellow fellow now, now, my my blood blood rises rises against against him him with with the the disinterested disinterested indignation indignation i i should should feel feel if if i i could could have have known known all all about about him him without without having having ever ever been been in in his his power; power; but but it it rises rises hotly, hotly, because because i i know know him him to to have have been been an an incapable incapable brute, brute, who who had had no no more more right right to to be be possessed possessed of of the the great great trust trust he he held, held, than than to to be be lord lord high high admiral, admiral, or or commander-in-chief commander-in-chief -- -- in in either either of of which which capacities capacities it it is is probable probable that that he he would would have have done done infinitely infinitely less less mischief. mischief. miserable miserable little little propitiators propitiators of of a a remorseless remorseless idol, idol, how how abject abject we we were were to to him! him! what what a a launch launch in in life life i i think think it it now, now, on on looking looking back, back, to to be be so so mean mean and and servile servile to to a a man man of of such such parts parts and and pretensions! pretensions! here here i i sit sit at at the the desk desk again, again, watching watching his his eye eye -- -- humbly humbly watching watching his his eye, eye, as as he he rules rules a a ciphering-book ciphering-book for for another another victim victim whose whose hands hands have have just just been been flattened flattened by by that that identical identical ruler, ruler, and and who who is is trying trying to to wipe wipe the the sting sting out out with with a a pocket-handkerchief. pocket-handkerchief. i i have have plenty plenty to to do. do. i i don't don't watch watch his his eye eye in in idleness, idleness, but but because because i i am am morbidly morbidly attracted attracted to to it, it, in in a a dread dread desire desire to to know know what what he he will will do do next, next, and and whether whether it it will will be be my my turn turn to to suffer, suffer, or or somebody somebody else's. else's. a a lane lane of of small small boys boys beyond beyond me, me, with with the the same same interest interest in in his his eye, eye, watch watch it it too. too. i i think think he he knows knows it, it, though though he he pretends pretends he he don't. don't. he he makes makes dreadful dreadful mouths mouths as as he he rules rules the the ciphering-book; ciphering-book; and and now now he he throws throws his his eye eye sideways sideways down down our our lane, lane, and and we we all all droop droop over over our our books books and and tremble. tremble. a a moment moment afterwards afterwards we we are are again again eyeing eyeing him. him. an an unhappy unhappy culprit, culprit, found found guilty guilty of of imperfect imperfect exercise, exercise, approaches approaches at at his his command. command. the the culprit culprit falters falters excuses, excuses, and and professes professes a a determination determination to to do do better better tomorrow. tomorrow. mr. mr. creakle creakle cuts cuts a a joke joke before before he he beats beats him, him, and and we we laugh laugh at at it, it, -- -- miserable miserable little little dogs, dogs, we we laugh, laugh, with with our our visages visages as as white white as as ashes, ashes, and and our our hearts hearts sinking sinking into into our our boots. boots. here here i i sit sit at at the the desk desk again, again, on on a a drowsy drowsy summer summer afternoon. afternoon. a a buzz buzz and and hum hum go go up up around around me, me, as as if if the the boys boys were were so so many many bluebottles. bluebottles. a a cloggy cloggy sensation sensation of of the the lukewarm lukewarm fat fat of of meat meat is is upon upon me me (we (we dined dined an an hour hour or or two two ago), ago), and and my my head head is is as as heavy heavy as as so so much much lead. lead. i i would would give give the the world world to to go go to to sleep. sleep. i i sit sit with with my my eye eye on on mr. mr. creakle, creakle, blinking blinking at at him him like like a a young young owl; owl; when when sleep sleep overpowers overpowers me me for for a a minute, minute, he he still still looms looms through through my my slumber, slumber, ruling ruling those those ciphering-books, ciphering-books, until until he he softly softly comes comes behind behind me me and and wakes wakes me me to to plainer plainer perception perception of of him, him, with with a a red red ridge ridge across across my my back. back. here here i i am am in in the the playground, playground, with with my my eye eye still still fascinated fascinated by by him, him, though though i i can't can't see see him. him. the the window window at at a a little little distance distance from from which which i i know know he he is is having having his his dinner, dinner, stands stands for for him, him, and and i i eye eye that that instead. instead. if if he he shows shows his his face face near near it, it, mine mine assumes assumes an an imploring imploring and and submissive submissive expression. expression. if if he he looks looks out out through through the the glass, glass, the the boldest boldest boy boy (steerforth (steerforth excepted) excepted) stops stops in in the the middle middle of of a a shout shout or or yell, yell, and and becomes becomes contemplative. contemplative. one one day, day, traddles traddles (the (the most most unfortunate unfortunate boy boy in in the the world) world) breaks breaks that that window window accidentally, accidentally, with with a a ball. ball. i i shudder shudder at at this this moment moment with with the the tremendous tremendous sensation sensation of of seeing seeing it it done, done, and and feeling feeling that that the the ball ball has has bounded bounded on on to to mr. mr. creakle's creakle's sacred sacred head. head. poor poor traddles! traddles! in in a a tight tight sky-blue sky-blue suit suit that that made made his his arms arms and and legs legs like like german german sausages, sausages, or or roly-poly roly-poly puddings, puddings, he he was was the the merriest merriest and and most most miserable miserable of of all all the the boys. boys. he he was was always always being being caned caned -- -- i i think think he he was was caned caned every every day day that that half-year, half-year, except except one one holiday holiday monday monday when when he he was was only only ruler'd ruler'd on on both both hands hands -- -- and and was was always always going going to to write write to to his his uncle uncle about about it, it, and and never never did. did. after after laying laying his his head head on on the the desk desk for for a a little little while, while, he he would would cheer cheer up, up, somehow, somehow, begin begin to to laugh laugh again, again, and and draw draw skeletons skeletons all all over over his his slate, slate, before before his his eyes eyes were were dry. dry. i i used used at at first first to to wonder wonder what what comfort comfort traddles traddles found found in in drawing drawing skeletons; skeletons; and and for for some some time time looked looked upon upon him him as as a a sort sort of of hermit, hermit, who who reminded reminded himself himself by by those those symbols symbols of of mortality mortality that that caning caning couldn't couldn't last last for for ever. ever. but but i i believe believe he he only only did did it it because because they they were were easy, easy, and and didn't didn't want want any any features. features. he he was was very very honourable, honourable, traddles traddles was, was, and and held held it it as as a a solemn solemn duty duty in in the the boys boys to to stand stand by by one one another. another. he he suffered suffered for for this this on on several several occasions; occasions; and and particularly particularly once, once, when when steerforth steerforth laughed laughed in in church, church, and and the the beadle beadle thought thought it it was was traddles, traddles, and and took took him him out. out. i i see see him him now, now, going going away away in in custody, custody, despised despised by by the the congregation. congregation. he he never never said said who who was was the the real real offender, offender, though though he he smarted smarted for for it it next next day, day, and and was was imprisoned imprisoned so so many many hours hours that that he he came came forth forth with with a a whole whole churchyard-full churchyard-full of of skeletons skeletons swarming swarming all all over over his his latin latin dictionary. dictionary. but but he he had had his his reward. reward. steerforth steerforth said said there there was was nothing nothing of of the the sneak sneak in in traddles, traddles, and and we we all all felt felt that that to to be be the the highest highest praise. praise. for for my my part, part, i i could could have have gone gone through through a a good good deal deal (though (though i i was was much much less less brave brave than than traddles, traddles, and and nothing nothing like like so so old) old) to to have have won won such such a a recompense. recompense. to to see see steerforth steerforth walk walk to to church church before before us, us, arm-in-arm arm-in-arm with with miss miss creakle, creakle, was was one one of of the the great great sights sights of of my my life. life. i i didn't didn't think think miss miss creakle creakle equal equal to to little little em'ly em'ly in in point point of of beauty, beauty, and and i i didn't didn't love love her her (i (i didn't didn't dare); dare); but but i i thought thought her her a a young young lady lady of of extraordinary extraordinary attractions, attractions, and and in in point point of of gentility gentility not not to to be be surpassed. surpassed. when when steerforth, steerforth, in in white white trousers, trousers, carried carried her her parasol parasol for for her, her, i i felt felt proud proud to to know know him; him; and and believed believed that that she she could could not not choose choose but but adore adore him him with with all all her her heart. heart. mr. mr. sharp sharp and and mr. mr. mell mell were were both both notable notable personages personages in in my my eyes; eyes; but but steerforth steerforth was was to to them them what what the the sun sun was was to to two two stars. stars. steerforth steerforth continued continued his his protection protection of of me, me, and and proved proved a a very very useful useful friend; friend; since since nobody nobody dared dared to to annoy annoy one one whom whom he he honoured honoured with with his his countenance. countenance. he he couldn't couldn't -- -- or or at at all all events events he he didn't didn't -- -- defend defend me me from from mr. mr. creakle, creakle, who who was was very very severe severe with with me; me; but but whenever whenever i i had had been been treated treated worse worse than than usual, usual, he he always always told told me me that that i i wanted wanted a a little little of of his his pluck, pluck, and and that that he he wouldn't wouldn't have have stood stood it it himself; himself; which which i i felt felt he he intended intended for for encouragement, encouragement, and and considered considered to to be be very very kind kind of of him. him. there there was was one one advantage, advantage, and and only only one one that that i i know know of, of, in in mr. mr. creakle's creakle's severity. severity. he he found found my my placard placard in in his his way way when when he he came came up up or or down down behind behind the the form form on on which which i i sat, sat, and and wanted wanted to to make make a a cut cut at at me me in in passing; passing; for for this this reason reason it it was was soon soon taken taken off, off, and and i i saw saw it it no no more. more. an an accidental accidental circumstance circumstance cemented cemented the the intimacy intimacy between between steerforth steerforth and and me, me, in in a a manner manner that that inspired inspired me me with with great great pride pride and and satisfaction, satisfaction, though though it it sometimes sometimes led led to to inconvenience. inconvenience. it it happened happened on on one one occasion, occasion, when when he he was was doing doing me me the the honour honour of of talking talking to to me me in in the the playground, playground, that that i i hazarded hazarded the the observation observation that that something something or or somebody somebody -- -- i i forget forget what what now now -- -- was was like like something something or or somebody somebody in in peregrine peregrine pickle. pickle. he he said said nothing nothing at at the the time; time; but but when when i i was was going going to to bed bed at at night, night, asked asked me me if if i i had had got got that that book? book? i i told told him him no, no, and and explained explained how how it it was was that that i i had had read read it, it, and and all all those those other other books books of of which which i i have have made made mention. mention. 'and 'and do do you recollect recollect them?' them?' steerforth steerforth said. said. 'oh 'oh yes,' yes,' i i replied; replied; i i had had a a good good memory, memory, and and i i believed believed i i recollected recollected them them very very well. well. 'then 'then i i tell tell you what, what, young young copperfield,' copperfield,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'you shall shall tell tell 'em 'em to to me. me. i i can't can't get get to to sleep sleep very very early early at at night, night, and and i i generally generally wake wake rather rather early early in in the the morning. morning. we'll we'll go go over over 'em 'em one one after after another. another. we'll we'll make make some some regular regular arabian arabian nights nights of of it.' it.' i i felt felt extremely extremely flattered flattered by by this this arrangement, arrangement, and and we we commenced commenced carrying carrying it it into into execution execution that that very very evening. evening. what what ravages ravages i i committed committed on on my my favourite favourite authors authors in in the the course course of of my my interpretation interpretation of of them, them, i i am am not not in in a a condition condition to to say, say, and and should should be be very very unwilling unwilling to to know; know; but but i i had had a a profound profound faith faith in in them, them, and and i i had, had, to to the the best best of of my my belief, belief, a a simple, simple, earnest earnest manner manner of of narrating narrating what what i i did did narrate; narrate; and and these these qualities qualities went went a a long long way. way. the the drawback drawback was, was, that that i i was was often often sleepy sleepy at at night, night, or or out out of of spirits spirits and and indisposed indisposed to to resume resume the the story; story; and and then then it it was was rather rather hard hard work, work, and and it it must must be be done; done; for for to to disappoint disappoint or or to to displease displease steerforth steerforth was was of of course course out out of of the the question. question. in in the the morning, morning, too, too, when when i i felt felt weary, weary, and and should should have have enjoyed enjoyed another another hour's hour's repose repose very very much, much, it it was was a a tiresome tiresome thing thing to to be be roused, roused, like like the the sultana sultana scheherazade, scheherazade, and and forced forced into into a a long long story story before before the the getting-up getting-up bell bell rang; rang; but but steerforth steerforth was was resolute; resolute; and and as as he he explained explained to to me, me, in in return, return, my my sums sums and and exercises, exercises, and and anything anything in in my my tasks tasks that that was was too too hard hard for for me, me, i i was was no no loser loser by by the the transaction. transaction. let let me me do do myself myself justice, justice, however. however. i i was was moved moved by by no no interested interested or or selfish selfish motive, motive, nor nor was was i i moved moved by by fear fear of of him. him. i i admired admired and and loved loved him, him, and and his his approval approval was was return return enough. enough. it it was was so so precious precious to to me me that that i i look look back back on on these these trifles, trifles, now, now, with with an an aching aching heart. heart. steerforth steerforth was was considerate, considerate, too; too; and and showed showed his his consideration, consideration, in in one one particular particular instance, instance, in in an an unflinching unflinching manner manner that that was was a a little little tantalizing, tantalizing, i i suspect, suspect, to to poor poor traddles traddles and and the the rest. rest. peggotty's peggotty's promised promised letter letter -- -- what what a a comfortable comfortable letter letter it it was! was! -- -- arrived arrived before before 'the 'the half' half' was was many many weeks weeks old; old; and and with with it it a a cake cake in in a a perfect perfect nest nest of of oranges, oranges, and and two two bottles bottles of of cowslip cowslip wine. wine. this this treasure, treasure, as as in in duty duty bound, bound, i i laid laid at at the the feet feet of of steerforth, steerforth, and and begged begged him him to to dispense. dispense. 'now, 'now, i'll i'll tell tell you what, what, young young copperfield,' copperfield,' said said he: he: 'the 'the wine wine shall shall be be kept kept to to wet wet your your whistle whistle when when you are are story-telling.' story-telling.' i i blushed blushed at at the the idea, idea, and and begged begged him, him, in in my my modesty, modesty, not not to to think think of of it. it. but but he he said said he he had had observed observed i i was was sometimes sometimes hoarse hoarse -- -- a a little little roopy roopy was was his his exact exact expression expression -- -- and and it it should should be, be, every every drop, drop, devoted devoted to to the the purpose purpose he he had had mentioned. mentioned. accordingly, accordingly, it it was was locked locked up up in in his his box, box, and and drawn drawn off off by by himself himself in in a a phial, phial, and and administered administered to to me me through through a a piece piece of of quill quill in in the the cork, cork, when when i i was was supposed supposed to to be be in in want want of of a a restorative. restorative. sometimes, sometimes, to to make make it it a a more more sovereign sovereign specific, specific, he he was was so so kind kind as as to to squeeze squeeze orange orange juice juice into into it, it, or or to to stir stir it it up up with with ginger, ginger, or or dissolve dissolve a a peppermint peppermint drop drop in in it; it; and and although although i i cannot cannot assert assert that that the the flavour flavour was was improved improved by by these these experiments, experiments, or or that that it it was was exactly exactly the the compound compound one one would would have have chosen chosen for for a a stomachic, stomachic, the the last last thing thing at at night night and and the the first first thing thing in in the the morning, morning, i i drank drank it it gratefully gratefully and and was was very very sensible sensible of of his his attention. attention. we we seem, seem, to to me, me, to to have have been been months months over over peregrine, peregrine, and and months months more more over over the the other other stories. stories. the the institution institution never never flagged flagged for for want want of of a a story, story, i i am am certain; certain; and and the the wine wine lasted lasted out out almost almost as as well well as as the the matter. matter. poor poor traddles traddles -- -- i i never never think think of of that that boy boy but but with with a a strange strange disposition disposition to to laugh, laugh, and and with with tears tears in in my my eyes eyes -- -- was was a a sort sort of of chorus, chorus, in in general; general; and and affected affected to to be be convulsed convulsed with with mirth mirth at at the the comic comic parts, parts, and and to to be be overcome overcome with with fear fear when when there there was was any any passage passage of of an an alarming alarming character character in in the the narrative. narrative. this this rather rather put put me me out, out, very very often. often. it it was was a a great great jest jest of of his, his, i i recollect, recollect, to to pretend pretend that that he he couldn't couldn't keep keep his his teeth teeth from from chattering, chattering, whenever whenever mention mention was was made made of of an an alguazill alguazill in in connexion connexion with with the the adventures adventures of of gil gil blas; blas; and and i i remember remember that that when when gil gil blas blas met met the the captain captain of of the the robbers robbers in in madrid, madrid, this this unlucky unlucky joker joker counterfeited counterfeited such such an an ague ague of of terror, terror, that that he he was was overheard overheard by by mr. mr. creakle, creakle, who who was was prowling prowling about about the the passage, passage, and and handsomely handsomely flogged flogged for for disorderly disorderly conduct conduct in in the the bedroom. bedroom. whatever whatever i i had had within within me me that that was was romantic romantic and and dreamy, dreamy, was was encouraged encouraged by by so so much much story-telling story-telling in in the the dark; dark; and and in in that that respect respect the the pursuit pursuit may may not not have have been been very very profitable profitable to to me. me. but but the the being being cherished cherished as as a a kind kind of of plaything plaything in in my my room, room, and and the the consciousness consciousness that that this this accomplishment accomplishment of of mine mine was was bruited bruited about about among among the the boys, boys, and and attracted attracted a a good good deal deal of of notice notice to to me me though though i i was was the the youngest youngest there, there, stimulated stimulated me me to to exertion. exertion. in in a a school school carried carried on on by by sheer sheer cruelty, cruelty, whether whether it it is is presided presided over over by by a a dunce dunce or or not, not, there there is is not not likely likely to to be be much much learnt. learnt. i i believe believe our our boys boys were, were, generally, generally, as as ignorant ignorant a a set set as as any any schoolboys schoolboys in in existence; existence; they they were were too too much much troubled troubled and and knocked knocked about about to to learn; learn; they they could could no no more more do do that that to to advantage, advantage, than than any any one one can can do do anything anything to to advantage advantage in in a a life life of of constant constant misfortune, misfortune, torment, torment, and and worry. worry. but but my my little little vanity, vanity, and and steerforth's steerforth's help, help, urged urged me me on on somehow; somehow; and and without without saving saving me me from from much, much, if if anything, anything, in in the the way way of of punishment, punishment, made made me, me, for for the the time time i i was was there, there, an an exception exception to to the the general general body, body, insomuch insomuch that that i i did did steadily steadily pick pick up up some some crumbs crumbs of of knowledge. knowledge. in in this this i i was was much much assisted assisted by by mr. mr. mell, mell, who who had had a a liking liking for for me me that that i i am am grateful grateful to to remember. remember. it it always always gave gave me me pain pain to to observe observe that that steerforth steerforth treated treated him him with with systematic systematic disparagement, disparagement, and and seldom seldom lost lost an an occasion occasion of of wounding wounding his his feelings, feelings, or or inducing inducing others others to to do do so. so. this this troubled troubled me me the the more more for for a a long long time, time, because because i i had had soon soon told told steerforth, steerforth, from from whom whom i i could could no no more more keep keep such such a a secret, secret, than than i i could could keep keep a a cake cake or or any any other other tangible tangible possession, possession, about about the the two two old old women women mr. mr. mell mell had had taken taken me me to to see; see; and and i i was was always always afraid afraid that that steerforth steerforth would would let let it it out, out, and and twit twit him him with with it. it. we we little little thought, thought, any any one one of of us, us, i i dare dare say, say, when when i i ate ate my my breakfast breakfast that that first first morning, morning, and and went went to to sleep sleep under under the the shadow shadow of of the the peacock's peacock's feathers feathers to to the the sound sound of of the the flute, flute, what what consequences consequences would would come come of of the the introduction introduction into into those those alms-houses alms-houses of of my my insignificant insignificant person. person. but but the the visit visit had had its its unforeseen unforeseen consequences; consequences; and and of of a a serious serious sort, sort, too, too, in in their their way. way. one one day day when when mr. mr. creakle creakle kept kept the the house house from from indisposition, indisposition, which which naturally naturally diffused diffused a a lively lively joy joy through through the the school, school, there there was was a a good good deal deal of of noise noise in in the the course course of of the the morning's morning's work. work. the the great great relief relief and and satisfaction satisfaction experienced experienced by by the the boys boys made made them them difficult difficult to to manage; manage; and and though though the the dreaded dreaded tungay tungay brought brought his his wooden wooden leg leg in in twice twice or or thrice, thrice, and and took took notes notes of of the the principal principal offenders' offenders' names, names, no no great great impression impression was was made made by by it, it, as as they they were were pretty pretty sure sure of of getting getting into into trouble trouble tomorrow, tomorrow, do do what what they they would, would, and and thought thought it it wise, wise, no no doubt, doubt, to to enjoy enjoy themselves themselves today. today. it it was, was, properly, properly, a a half-holiday; half-holiday; being being saturday. saturday. but but as as the the noise noise in in the the playground playground would would have have disturbed disturbed mr. mr. creakle, creakle, and and the the weather weather was was not not favourable favourable for for going going out out walking, walking, we we were were ordered ordered into into school school in in the the afternoon, afternoon, and and set set some some lighter lighter tasks tasks than than usual, usual, which which were were made made for for the the occasion. occasion. it it was was the the day day of of the the week week on on which which mr. mr. sharp sharp went went out out to to get get his his wig wig curled; curled; so so mr. mr. mell, mell, who who always always did did the the drudgery, drudgery, whatever whatever it it was, was, kept kept school school by by himself. himself. if if i i could could associate associate the the idea idea of of a a bull bull or or a a bear bear with with anyone anyone so so mild mild as as mr. mr. mell, mell, i i should should think think of of him, him, in in connexion connexion with with that that afternoon afternoon when when the the uproar uproar was was at at its its height, height, as as of of one one of of those those animals, animals, baited baited by by a a thousand thousand dogs. dogs. i i recall recall him him bending bending his his aching aching head, head, supported supported on on his his bony bony hand, hand, over over the the book book on on his his desk, desk, and and wretchedly wretchedly endeavouring endeavouring to to get get on on with with his his tiresome tiresome work, work, amidst amidst an an uproar uproar that that might might have have made made the the speaker speaker of of the the house house of of commons commons giddy. giddy. boys boys started started in in and and out out of of their their places, places, playing playing at at puss puss in in the the corner corner with with other other boys; boys; there there were were laughing laughing boys, boys, singing singing boys, boys, talking talking boys, boys, dancing dancing boys, boys, howling howling boys; boys; boys boys shuffled shuffled with with their their feet, feet, boys boys whirled whirled about about him, him, grinning, grinning, making making faces, faces, mimicking mimicking him him behind behind his his back back and and before before his his eyes; eyes; mimicking mimicking his his poverty, poverty, his his boots, boots, his his coat, coat, his his mother, mother, everything everything belonging belonging to to him him that that they they should should have have had had consideration consideration for. for. 'silence!' 'silence!' cried cried mr. mr. mell, mell, suddenly suddenly rising rising up, up, and and striking striking his his desk desk with with the the book. book. 'what 'what does does this this mean! mean! it's it's impossible impossible to to bear bear it. it. it's it's maddening. maddening. how how can can you do do it it to to me, me, boys?' boys?' it it was was my my book book that that he he struck struck his his desk desk with; with; and and as as i i stood stood beside beside him, him, following following his his eye eye as as it it glanced glanced round round the the room, room, i i saw saw the the boys boys all all stop, stop, some some suddenly suddenly surprised, surprised, some some half half afraid, afraid, and and some some sorry sorry perhaps. perhaps. steerforth's steerforth's place place was was at at the the bottom bottom of of the the school, school, at at the the opposite opposite end end of of the the long long room. room. he he was was lounging lounging with with his his back back against against the the wall, wall, and and his his hands hands in in his his pockets, pockets, and and looked looked at at mr. mr. mell mell with with his his mouth mouth shut shut up up as as if if he he were were whistling, whistling, when when mr. mr. mell mell looked looked at at him. him. 'silence, 'silence, mr. mr. steerforth!' steerforth!' said said mr. mr. mell. mell. 'silence 'silence yourself,' yourself,' said said steerforth, steerforth, turning turning red. red. 'whom 'whom are are you talking talking to?' to?' 'sit 'sit down,' down,' said said mr. mr. mell. mell. 'sit 'sit down down yourself,' yourself,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'and 'and mind mind your your business.' business.' there there was was a a titter, titter, and and some some applause; applause; but but mr. mr. mell mell was was so so white, white, that that silence silence immediately immediately succeeded; succeeded; and and one one boy, boy, who who had had darted darted out out behind behind him him to to imitate imitate his his mother mother again, again, changed changed his his mind, mind, and and pretended pretended to to want want a a pen pen mended. mended. 'if 'if you think, think, steerforth,' steerforth,' said said mr. mr. mell, mell, 'that 'that i i am am not not acquainted acquainted with with the the power power you can can establish establish over over any any mind mind here' here' -- -- he he laid laid his his hand, hand, without without considering considering what what he he did did (as (as i i supposed), supposed), upon upon my my head head -- -- 'or 'or that that i i have have not not observed observed you, within within a a few few minutes, minutes, urging urging your your juniors juniors on on to to every every sort sort of of outrage outrage against against me, me, you are are mistaken.' mistaken.' 'i 'i don't don't give give myself myself the the trouble trouble of of thinking thinking at at all all about about you,' said said steerforth, steerforth, coolly; coolly; 'so 'so i'm i'm not not mistaken, mistaken, as as it it happens.' happens.' 'and 'and when when you make make use use of of your your position position of of favouritism favouritism here, here, sir,' sir,' pursued pursued mr. mr. mell, mell, with with his his lip lip trembling trembling very very much, much, 'to 'to insult insult a a gentleman gentleman -- -- ' ' 'a 'a what? what? -- -- where where is is he?' he?' said said steerforth. steerforth. here here somebody somebody cried cried out, out, 'shame, 'shame, j. j. steerforth! steerforth! too too bad!' bad!' it it was was traddles; traddles; whom whom mr. mr. mell mell instantly instantly discomfited discomfited by by bidding bidding him him hold hold his his tongue. tongue. -- -- 'to 'to insult insult one one who who is is not not fortunate fortunate in in life, life, sir, sir, and and who who never never gave gave you the the least least offence, offence, and and the the many many reasons reasons for for not not insulting insulting whom whom you are are old old enough enough and and wise wise enough enough to to understand,' understand,' said said mr. mr. mell, mell, with with his his lips lips trembling trembling more more and and more, more, 'you commit commit a a mean mean and and base base action. action. you can can sit sit down down or or stand stand up up as as you please, please, sir. sir. copperfield, copperfield, go go on.' on.' 'young 'young copperfield,' copperfield,' said said steerforth, steerforth, coming coming forward forward up up the the room, room, 'stop 'stop a a bit. bit. i i tell tell you what, what, mr. mr. mell, mell, once once for for all. all. when when you take take the the liberty liberty of of calling calling me me mean mean or or base, base, or or anything anything of of that that sort, sort, you are are an an impudent impudent beggar. beggar. you are are always always a a beggar, beggar, you know; know; but but when when you do do that, that, you are are an an impudent impudent beggar.' beggar.' i i am am not not clear clear whether whether he he was was going going to to strike strike mr. mr. mell, mell, or or mr. mr. mell mell was was going going to to strike strike him, him, or or there there was was any any such such intention intention on on either either side. side. i i saw saw a a rigidity rigidity come come upon upon the the whole whole school school as as if if they they had had been been turned turned into into stone, stone, and and found found mr. mr. creakle creakle in in the the midst midst of of us, us, with with tungay tungay at at his his side, side, and and mrs. mrs. and and miss miss creakle creakle looking looking in in at at the the door door as as if if they they were were frightened. frightened. mr. mr. mell, mell, with with his his elbows elbows on on his his desk desk and and his his face face in in his his hands, hands, sat, sat, for for some some moments, moments, quite quite still. still. 'mr. 'mr. mell,' mell,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, shaking shaking him him by by the the arm; arm; and and his his whisper whisper was was so so audible audible now, now, that that tungay tungay felt felt it it unnecessary unnecessary to to repeat repeat his his words; words; 'you have have not not forgotten forgotten yourself, yourself, i i hope?' hope?' 'no, 'no, sir, sir, no,' no,' returned returned the the master, master, showing showing his his face, face, and and shaking shaking his his head, head, and and rubbing rubbing his his hands hands in in great great agitation. agitation. 'no, 'no, sir. sir. no. no. i i have have remembered remembered myself, myself, i i -- -- no, no, mr. mr. creakle, creakle, i i have have not not forgotten forgotten myself, myself, i i -- -- i i have have remembered remembered myself, myself, sir. sir. i i -- -- i i -- -- could could wish wish you had had remembered remembered me me a a little little sooner, sooner, mr. mr. creakle. creakle. it it -- -- it it -- -- would would have have been been more more kind, kind, sir, sir, more more just, just, sir. sir. it it would would have have saved saved me me something, something, sir.' sir.' mr. mr. creakle, creakle, looking looking hard hard at at mr. mr. mell, mell, put put his his hand hand on on tungay's tungay's shoulder, shoulder, and and got got his his feet feet upon upon the the form form close close by, by, and and sat sat upon upon the the desk. desk. after after still still looking looking hard hard at at mr. mr. mell mell from from his his throne, throne, as as he he shook shook his his head, head, and and rubbed rubbed his his hands, hands, and and remained remained in in the the same same state state of of agitation, agitation, mr. mr. creakle creakle turned turned to to steerforth, steerforth, and and said: said: 'now, 'now, sir, sir, as as he he don't don't condescend condescend to to tell tell me, me, what what is is this?' this?' steerforth steerforth evaded evaded the the question question for for a a little little while; while; looking looking in in scorn scorn and and anger anger on on his his opponent, opponent, and and remaining remaining silent. silent. i i could could not not help help thinking thinking even even in in that that interval, interval, i i remember, remember, what what a a noble noble fellow fellow he he was was in in appearance, appearance, and and how how homely homely and and plain plain mr. mr. mell mell looked looked opposed opposed to to him. him. 'what 'what did did he he mean mean by by talking talking about about favourites, favourites, then?' then?' said said steerforth steerforth at at length. length. 'favourites?' 'favourites?' repeated repeated mr. mr. creakle, creakle, with with the the veins veins in in his his forehead forehead swelling swelling quickly. quickly. 'who 'who talked talked about about favourites?' favourites?' 'he 'he did,' did,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'and 'and pray, pray, what what did did you mean mean by by that, that, sir?' sir?' demanded demanded mr. mr. creakle, creakle, turning turning angrily angrily on on his his assistant. assistant. 'i 'i meant, meant, mr. mr. creakle,' creakle,' he he returned returned in in a a low low voice, voice, 'as 'as i i said; said; that that no no pupil pupil had had a a right right to to avail avail himself himself of of his his position position of of favouritism favouritism to to degrade degrade me.' me.' 'to 'to degrade degrade you?' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'my 'my stars! stars! but but give give me me leave leave to to ask ask you, mr. mr. what's-your-name'; what's-your-name'; and and here here mr. mr. creakle creakle folded folded his his arms, arms, cane cane and and all, all, upon upon his his chest, chest, and and made made such such a a knot knot of of his his brows brows that that his his little little eyes eyes were were hardly hardly visible visible below below them; them; 'whether, 'whether, when when you talk talk about about favourites, favourites, you showed showed proper proper respect respect to to me? me? to to me, me, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, darting darting his his head head at at him him suddenly, suddenly, and and drawing drawing it it back back again, again, 'the 'the principal principal of of this this establishment, establishment, and and your your employer.' employer.' 'it 'it was was not not judicious, judicious, sir, sir, i i am am willing willing to to admit,' admit,' said said mr. mr. mell. mell. 'i 'i should should not not have have done done so, so, if if i i had had been been cool.' cool.' here here steerforth steerforth struck struck in. in. 'then 'then he he said said i i was was mean, mean, and and then then he he said said i i was was base, base, and and then then i i called called him him a a beggar. beggar. if if i i had had been been cool, cool, perhaps perhaps i i shouldn't shouldn't have have called called him him a a beggar. beggar. but but i i did, did, and and i i am am ready ready to to take take the the consequences consequences of of it.' it.' without without considering, considering, perhaps, perhaps, whether whether there there were were any any consequences consequences to to be be taken, taken, i i felt felt quite quite in in a a glow glow at at this this gallant gallant speech. speech. it it made made an an impression impression on on the the boys boys too, too, for for there there was was a a low low stir stir among among them, them, though though no no one one spoke spoke a a word. word. 'i 'i am am surprised, surprised, steerforth steerforth -- -- although although your your candour candour does does you honour,' honour,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, 'does 'does you honour, honour, certainly certainly -- -- i i am am surprised, surprised, steerforth, steerforth, i i must must say, say, that that you should should attach attach such such an an epithet epithet to to any any person person employed employed and and paid paid in in salem salem house, house, sir.' sir.' steerforth steerforth gave gave a a short short laugh. laugh. 'that's 'that's not not an an answer, answer, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, 'to 'to my my remark. remark. i i expect expect more more than than that that from from you, steerforth.' steerforth.' if if mr. mr. mell mell looked looked homely, homely, in in my my eyes, eyes, before before the the handsome handsome boy, boy, it it would would be be quite quite impossible impossible to to say say how how homely homely mr. mr. creakle creakle looked. looked. 'let 'let him him deny deny it,' it,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'deny 'deny that that he he is is a a beggar, beggar, steerforth?' steerforth?' cried cried mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'why, 'why, where where does does he he go go a-begging?' a-begging?' 'if 'if he he is is not not a a beggar beggar himself, himself, his his near near relation's relation's one,' one,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'it's 'it's all all the the same.' same.' he he glanced glanced at at me, me, and and mr. mr. mell's mell's hand hand gently gently patted patted me me upon upon the the shoulder. shoulder. i i looked looked up up with with a a flush flush upon upon my my face face and and remorse remorse in in my my heart, heart, but but mr. mr. mell's mell's eyes eyes were were fixed fixed on on steerforth. steerforth. he he continued continued to to pat pat me me kindly kindly on on the the shoulder, shoulder, but but he he looked looked at at him. him. 'since 'since you expect expect me, me, mr. mr. creakle, creakle, to to justify justify myself,' myself,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'and 'and to to say say what what i i mean, mean, -- -- what what i i have have to to say say is, is, that that his his mother mother lives lives on on charity charity in in an an alms-house.' alms-house.' mr. mr. mell mell still still looked looked at at him, him, and and still still patted patted me me kindly kindly on on the the shoulder, shoulder, and and said said to to himself, himself, in in a a whisper, whisper, if if i i heard heard right: right: 'yes, 'yes, i i thought thought so.' so.' mr. mr. creakle creakle turned turned to to his his assistant, assistant, with with a a severe severe frown frown and and laboured laboured politeness: politeness: 'now, 'now, you hear hear what what this this gentleman gentleman says, says, mr. mr. mell. mell. have have the the goodness, goodness, if if you please, please, to to set set him him right right before before the the assembled assembled school.' school.' 'he 'he is is right, right, sir, sir, without without correction,' correction,' returned returned mr. mr. mell, mell, in in the the midst midst of of a a dead dead silence; silence; 'what 'what he he has has said said is is true.' true.' 'be 'be so so good good then then as as declare declare publicly, publicly, will will you,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, putting putting his his head head on on one one side, side, and and rolling rolling his his eyes eyes round round the the school, school, 'whether 'whether it it ever ever came came to to my my knowledge knowledge until until this this moment?' moment?' 'i 'i believe believe not not directly,' directly,' he he returned. returned. 'why, 'why, you know know not,' not,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'don't 'don't you, man?' man?' 'i 'i apprehend apprehend you never never supposed supposed my my worldly worldly circumstances circumstances to to be be very very good,' good,' replied replied the the assistant. assistant. 'you know know what what my my position position is, is, and and always always has has been, been, here.' here.' 'i 'i apprehend, apprehend, if if you come come to to that,' that,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, with with his his veins veins swelling swelling again again bigger bigger than than ever, ever, 'that 'that you've you've been been in in a a wrong wrong position position altogether, altogether, and and mistook mistook this this for for a a charity charity school. school. mr. mr. mell, mell, we'll we'll part, part, if if you please. please. the the sooner sooner the the better.' better.' 'there 'there is is no no time,' time,' answered answered mr. mr. mell, mell, rising, rising, 'like 'like the the present.' present.' 'sir, 'sir, to to you!' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'i 'i take take my my leave leave of of you, mr. mr. creakle, creakle, and and all all of of you,' said said mr. mr. mell, mell, glancing glancing round round the the room, room, and and again again patting patting me me gently gently on on the the shoulders. shoulders. 'james 'james steerforth, steerforth, the the best best wish wish i i can can leave leave you is is that that you may may come come to to be be ashamed ashamed of of what what you have have done done today. today. at at present present i i would would prefer prefer to to see see you anything anything rather rather than than a a friend, friend, to to me, me, or or to to anyone anyone in in whom whom i i feel feel an an interest.' interest.' once once more more he he laid laid his his hand hand upon upon my my shoulder; shoulder; and and then then taking taking his his flute flute and and a a few few books books from from his his desk, desk, and and leaving leaving the the key key in in it it for for his his successor, successor, he he went went out out of of the the school, school, with with his his property property under under his his arm. arm. mr. mr. creakle creakle then then made made a a speech, speech, through through tungay, tungay, in in which which he he thanked thanked steerforth steerforth for for asserting asserting (though (though perhaps perhaps too too warmly) warmly) the the independence independence and and respectability respectability of of salem salem house; house; and and which which he he wound wound up up by by shaking shaking hands hands with with steerforth, steerforth, while while we we gave gave three three cheers cheers -- -- i i did did not not quite quite know know what what for, for, but but i i supposed supposed for for steerforth, steerforth, and and so so joined joined in in them them ardently, ardently, though though i i felt felt miserable. miserable. mr. mr. creakle creakle then then caned caned tommy tommy traddles traddles for for being being discovered discovered in in tears, tears, instead instead of of cheers, cheers, on on account account of of mr. mr. mell's mell's departure; departure; and and went went back back to to his his sofa, sofa, or or his his bed, bed, or or wherever wherever he he had had come come from. from. we we were were left left to to ourselves ourselves now, now, and and looked looked very very blank, blank, i i recollect, recollect, on on one one another. another. for for myself, myself, i i felt felt so so much much self-reproach self-reproach and and contrition contrition for for my my part part in in what what had had happened, happened, that that nothing nothing would would have have enabled enabled me me to to keep keep back back my my tears tears but but the the fear fear that that steerforth, steerforth, who who often often looked looked at at me, me, i i saw, saw, might might think think it it unfriendly unfriendly -- -- or, or, i i should should rather rather say, say, considering considering our our relative relative ages, ages, and and the the feeling feeling with with which which i i regarded regarded him, him, undutiful undutiful -- -- if if i i showed showed the the emotion emotion which which distressed distressed me. me. he he was was very very angry angry with with traddles, traddles, and and said said he he was was glad glad he he had had caught caught it. it. poor poor traddles, traddles, who who had had passed passed the the stage stage of of lying lying with with his his head head upon upon the the desk, desk, and and was was relieving relieving himself himself as as usual usual with with a a burst burst of of skeletons, skeletons, said said he he didn't didn't care. care. mr. mr. mell mell was was ill-used. ill-used. 'who 'who has has ill-used ill-used him, him, you girl?' girl?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'why, 'why, you have,' have,' returned returned traddles. traddles. 'what 'what have have i i done?' done?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'what 'what have have you done?' done?' retorted retorted traddles. traddles. 'hurt 'hurt his his feelings, feelings, and and lost lost him him his his situation.' situation.' 'his 'his feelings?' feelings?' repeated repeated steerforth steerforth disdainfully. disdainfully. 'his 'his feelings feelings will will soon soon get get the the better better of of it, it, i'll i'll be be bound. bound. his his feelings feelings are are not not like like yours, yours, miss miss traddles. traddles. as as to to his his situation situation -- -- which which was was a a precious precious one, one, wasn't wasn't it? it? -- -- do do you suppose suppose i i am am not not going going to to write write home, home, and and take take care care that that he he gets gets some some money? money? polly?' polly?' we we thought thought this this intention intention very very noble noble in in steerforth, steerforth, whose whose mother mother was was a a widow, widow, and and rich, rich, and and would would do do almost almost anything, anything, it it was was said, said, that that he he asked asked her. her. we we were were all all extremely extremely glad glad to to see see traddles traddles so so put put down, down, and and exalted exalted steerforth steerforth to to the the skies: skies: especially especially when when he he told told us, us, as as he he condescended condescended to to do, do, that that what what he he had had done done had had been been done done expressly expressly for for us, us, and and for for our our cause; cause; and and that that he he had had conferred conferred a a great great boon boon upon upon us us by by unselfishly unselfishly doing doing it. it. but but i i must must say say that that when when i i was was going going on on with with a a story story in in the the dark dark that that night, night, mr. mr. mell's mell's old old flute flute seemed seemed more more than than once once to to sound sound mournfully mournfully in in my my ears; ears; and and that that when when at at last last steerforth steerforth was was tired, tired, and and i i lay lay down down in in my my bed, bed, i i fancied fancied it it playing playing so so sorrowfully sorrowfully somewhere, somewhere, that that i i was was quite quite wretched. wretched. i i soon soon forgot forgot him him in in the the contemplation contemplation of of steerforth, steerforth, who, who, in in an an easy easy amateur amateur way, way, and and without without any any book book (he (he seemed seemed to to me me to to know know everything everything by by heart), heart), took took some some of of his his classes classes until until a a new new master master was was found. found. the the new new master master came came from from a a grammar grammar school; school; and and before before he he entered entered on on his his duties, duties, dined dined in in the the parlour parlour one one day, day, to to be be introduced introduced to to steerforth. steerforth. steerforth steerforth approved approved of of him him highly, highly, and and told told us us he he was was a a brick. brick. without without exactly exactly understanding understanding what what learned learned distinction distinction was was meant meant by by this, this, i i respected respected him him greatly greatly for for it, it, and and had had no no doubt doubt whatever whatever of of his his superior superior knowledge: knowledge: though though he he never never took took the the pains pains with with me me -- -- not not that that i i was was anybody anybody -- -- that that mr. mr. mell mell had had taken. taken. there there was was only only one one other other event event in in this this half-year, half-year, out out of of the the daily daily school-life, school-life, that that made made an an impression impression upon upon me me which which still still survives. survives. it it survives survives for for many many reasons. reasons. one one afternoon, afternoon, when when we we were were all all harassed harassed into into a a state state of of dire dire confusion, confusion, and and mr. mr. creakle creakle was was laying laying about about him him dreadfully, dreadfully, tungay tungay came came in, in, and and called called out out in in his his usual usual strong strong way: way: 'visitors 'visitors for for copperfield!' copperfield!' a a few few words words were were interchanged interchanged between between him him and and mr. mr. creakle, creakle, as, as, who who the the visitors visitors were, were, and and what what room room they they were were to to be be shown shown into; into; and and then then i, i, who who had, had, according according to to custom, custom, stood stood up up on on the the announcement announcement being being made, made, and and felt felt quite quite faint faint with with astonishment, astonishment, was was told told to to go go by by the the back back stairs stairs and and get get a a clean clean frill frill on, on, before before i i repaired repaired to to the the dining-room. dining-room. these these orders orders i i obeyed, obeyed, in in such such a a flutter flutter and and hurry hurry of of my my young young spirits spirits as as i i had had never never known known before; before; and and when when i i got got to to the the parlour parlour door, door, and and the the thought thought came came into into my my head head that that it it might might be be my my mother mother -- -- i i had had only only thought thought of of mr. mr. or or miss miss murdstone murdstone until until then then -- -- i i drew drew back back my my hand hand from from the the lock, lock, and and stopped stopped to to have have a a sob sob before before i i went went in. in. at at first first i i saw saw nobody; nobody; but but feeling feeling a a pressure pressure against against the the door, door, i i looked looked round round it, it, and and there, there, to to my my amazement, amazement, were were mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and ham, ham, ducking ducking at at me me with with their their hats, hats, and and squeezing squeezing one one another another against against the the wall. wall. i i could could not not help help laughing; laughing; but but it it was was much much more more in in the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing them, them, than than at at the the appearance appearance they they made. made. we we shook shook hands hands in in a a very very cordial cordial way; way; and and i i laughed laughed and and laughed, laughed, until until i i pulled pulled out out my my pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief and and wiped wiped my my eyes. eyes. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty (who (who never never shut shut his his mouth mouth once, once, i i remember, remember, during during the the visit) visit) showed showed great great concern concern when when he he saw saw me me do do this, this, and and nudged nudged ham ham to to say say something. something. 'cheer 'cheer up, up, mas'r mas'r davy davy bor'!' bor'!' said said ham, ham, in in his his simpering simpering way. way. 'why, 'why, how how you have have growed!' growed!' 'am 'am i i grown?' grown?' i i said, said, drying drying my my eyes. eyes. i i was was not not crying crying at at anything anything in in particular particular that that i i know know of; of; but but somehow somehow it it made made me me cry, cry, to to see see old old friends. friends. 'growed, 'growed, mas'r mas'r davy davy bor'? bor'? ain't ain't he he growed!' growed!' said said ham. ham. 'ain't 'ain't he he growed!' growed!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. they they made made me me laugh laugh again again by by laughing laughing at at each each other, other, and and then then we we all all three three laughed laughed until until i i was was in in danger danger of of crying crying again. again. 'do 'do you know know how how mama mama is, is, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' i i said. said. 'and 'and how how my my dear, dear, dear, dear, old old peggotty peggotty is?' is?' 'oncommon,' 'oncommon,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'and 'and little little em'ly, em'ly, and and mrs. mrs. gummidge?' gummidge?' 'on 'on -- -- common,' common,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. there there was was a a silence. silence. mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, to to relieve relieve it, it, took took two two prodigious prodigious lobsters, lobsters, and and an an enormous enormous crab, crab, and and a a large large canvas canvas bag bag of of shrimps, shrimps, out out of of his his pockets, pockets, and and piled piled them them up up in in ham's ham's arms. arms. 'you see,' see,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'knowing 'knowing as as you was was partial partial to to a a little little relish relish with with your your wittles wittles when when you was was along along with with us, us, we we took took the the liberty. liberty. the the old old mawther mawther biled biled 'em, 'em, she she did. did. mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge biled biled 'em. 'em. yes,' yes,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, slowly, slowly, who who i i thought thought appeared appeared to to stick stick to to the the subject subject on on account account of of having having no no other other subject subject ready, ready, 'mrs. 'mrs. gummidge, gummidge, i i do do assure assure you, she she biled biled 'em.' 'em.' i i expressed expressed my my thanks; thanks; and and mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, after after looking looking at at ham, ham, who who stood stood smiling smiling sheepishly sheepishly over over the the shellfish, shellfish, without without making making any any attempt attempt to to help help him, him, said: said: 'we 'we come, come, you see, see, the the wind wind and and tide tide making making in in our our favour, favour, in in one one of of our our yarmouth yarmouth lugs lugs to to gravesen'. gravesen'. my my sister sister she she wrote wrote to to me me the the name name of of this this here here place, place, and and wrote wrote to to me me as as if if ever ever i i chanced chanced to to come come to to gravesen', gravesen', i i was was to to come come over over and and inquire inquire for for mas'r mas'r davy davy and and give give her her dooty, dooty, humbly humbly wishing wishing him him well well and and reporting reporting of of the the fam'ly fam'ly as as they they was was oncommon oncommon toe-be-sure. toe-be-sure. little little em'ly, em'ly, you see, see, she'll she'll write write to to my my sister sister when when i i go go back, back, as as i i see see you and and as as you was was similarly similarly oncommon, oncommon, and and so so we we make make it it quite quite a a merry-go-rounder.' merry-go-rounder.' i i was was obliged obliged to to consider consider a a little little before before i i understood understood what what mr. mr. peggotty peggotty meant meant by by this this figure, figure, expressive expressive of of a a complete complete circle circle of of intelligence. intelligence. i i then then thanked thanked him him heartily; heartily; and and said, said, with with a a consciousness consciousness of of reddening, reddening, that that i i supposed supposed little little em'ly em'ly was was altered altered too, too, since since we we used used to to pick pick up up shells shells and and pebbles pebbles on on the the beach? beach? 'she's 'she's getting getting to to be be a a woman, woman, that's that's wot wot she's she's getting getting to to be,' be,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'ask 'ask him.' him.' he he meant meant ham, ham, who who beamed beamed with with delight delight and and assent assent over over the the bag bag of of shrimps. shrimps. 'her 'her pretty pretty face!' face!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with his his own own shining shining like like a a light. light. 'her 'her learning!' learning!' said said ham. ham. 'her 'her writing!' writing!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'why 'why it's it's as as black black as as jet! jet! and and so so large large it it is, is, you might might see see it it anywheres.' anywheres.' it it was was perfectly perfectly delightful delightful to to behold behold with with what what enthusiasm enthusiasm mr. mr. peggotty peggotty became became inspired inspired when when he he thought thought of of his his little little favourite. favourite. he he stands stands before before me me again, again, his his bluff bluff hairy hairy face face irradiating irradiating with with a a joyful joyful love love and and pride, pride, for for which which i i can can find find no no description. description. his his honest honest eyes eyes fire fire up, up, and and sparkle, sparkle, as as if if their their depths depths were were stirred stirred by by something something bright. bright. his his broad broad chest chest heaves heaves with with pleasure. pleasure. his his strong strong loose loose hands hands clench clench themselves, themselves, in in his his earnestness; earnestness; and and he he emphasizes emphasizes what what he he says says with with a a right right arm arm that that shows, shows, in in my my pigmy pigmy view, view, like like a a sledge-hammer. sledge-hammer. ham ham was was quite quite as as earnest earnest as as he. he. i i dare dare say say they they would would have have said said much much more more about about her, her, if if they they had had not not been been abashed abashed by by the the unexpected unexpected coming coming in in of of steerforth, steerforth, who, who, seeing seeing me me in in a a corner corner speaking speaking with with two two strangers, strangers, stopped stopped in in a a song song he he was was singing, singing, and and said: said: 'i 'i didn't didn't know know you were were here, here, young young copperfield!' copperfield!' (for (for it it was was not not the the usual usual visiting visiting room) room) and and crossed crossed by by us us on on his his way way out. out. i i am am not not sure sure whether whether it it was was in in the the pride pride of of having having such such a a friend friend as as steerforth, steerforth, or or in in the the desire desire to to explain explain to to him him how how i i came came to to have have such such a a friend friend as as mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, that that i i called called to to him him as as he he was was going going away. away. but but i i said, said, modestly modestly -- -- good good heaven, heaven, how how it it all all comes comes back back to to me me this this long long time time afterwards afterwards -- -- ! ! 'don't 'don't go, go, steerforth, steerforth, if if you please. please. these these are are two two yarmouth yarmouth boatmen boatmen -- -- very very kind, kind, good good people people -- -- who who are are relations relations of of my my nurse, nurse, and and have have come come from from gravesend gravesend to to see see me.' me.' 'aye, 'aye, aye?' aye?' said said steerforth, steerforth, returning. returning. 'i 'i am am glad glad to to see see them. them. how how are are you both?' both?' there there was was an an ease ease in in his his manner manner -- -- a a gay gay and and light light manner manner it it was, was, but but not not swaggering swaggering -- -- which which i i still still believe believe to to have have borne borne a a kind kind of of enchantment enchantment with with it. it. i i still still believe believe him, him, in in virtue virtue of of this this carriage, carriage, his his animal animal spirits, spirits, his his delightful delightful voice, voice, his his handsome handsome face face and and figure, figure, and, and, for for aught aught i i know, know, of of some some inborn inborn power power of of attraction attraction besides besides (which (which i i think think a a few few people people possess), possess), to to have have carried carried a a spell spell with with him him to to which which it it was was a a natural natural weakness weakness to to yield, yield, and and which which not not many many persons persons could could withstand. withstand. i i could could not not but but see see how how pleased pleased they they were were with with him, him, and and how how they they seemed seemed to to open open their their hearts hearts to to him him in in a a moment. moment. 'you must must let let them them know know at at home, home, if if you please, please, mr. mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' i i said, said, 'when 'when that that letter letter is is sent, sent, that that mr. mr. steerforth steerforth is is very very kind kind to to me, me, and and that that i i don't don't know know what what i i should should ever ever do do here here without without him.' him.' 'nonsense!' 'nonsense!' said said steerforth, steerforth, laughing. laughing. 'you mustn't mustn't tell tell them them anything anything of of the the sort.' sort.' 'and 'and if if mr. mr. steerforth steerforth ever ever comes comes into into norfolk norfolk or or suffolk, suffolk, mr. mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' i i said, said, 'while 'while i i am am there, there, you may may depend depend upon upon it it i i shall shall bring bring him him to to yarmouth, yarmouth, if if he he will will let let me, me, to to see see your your house. house. you never never saw saw such such a a good good house, house, steerforth. steerforth. it's it's made made out out of of a a boat!' boat!' 'made 'made out out of of a a boat, boat, is is it?' it?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'it's 'it's the the right right sort sort of of a a house house for for such such a a thorough-built thorough-built boatman.' boatman.' 'so 'so 'tis, 'tis, sir, sir, so so 'tis, 'tis, sir,' sir,' said said ham, ham, grinning. grinning. 'you're 'you're right, right, young young gen'l'm'n! gen'l'm'n! mas'r mas'r davy davy bor', bor', gen'l'm'n's gen'l'm'n's right. right. a a thorough-built thorough-built boatman! boatman! hor, hor, hor! hor! that's that's what what he he is, is, too!' too!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was no no less less pleased pleased than than his his nephew, nephew, though though his his modesty modesty forbade forbade him him to to claim claim a a personal personal compliment compliment so so vociferously. vociferously. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, bowing bowing and and chuckling, chuckling, and and tucking tucking in in the the ends ends of of his his neckerchief neckerchief at at his his breast: breast: 'i 'i thankee, thankee, sir, sir, i i thankee! thankee! i i do do my my endeavours endeavours in in my my line line of of life, life, sir.' sir.' 'the 'the best best of of men men can can do do no no more, more, mr. mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' said said steerforth. steerforth. he he had had got got his his name name already. already. 'i'll 'i'll pound pound it, it, it's it's wot wot you do do yourself, yourself, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'and 'and wot wot you do do well well -- -- right right well! well! i i thankee, thankee, sir. sir. i'm i'm obleeged obleeged to to you, sir, sir, for for your your welcoming welcoming manner manner of of me. me. i'm i'm rough, rough, sir, sir, but but i'm i'm ready ready -- -- least least ways, ways, i i hope hope i'm i'm ready, ready, you unnerstand. unnerstand. my my house house ain't ain't much much for for to to see, see, sir, sir, but but it's it's hearty hearty at at your your service service if if ever ever you should should come come along along with with mas'r mas'r davy davy to to see see it. it. i'm i'm a a reg'lar reg'lar dodman, dodman, i i am,' am,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, by by which which he he meant meant snail, snail, and and this this was was in in allusion allusion to to his his being being slow slow to to go, go, for for he he had had attempted attempted to to go go after after every every sentence, sentence, and and had had somehow somehow or or other other come come back back again; again; 'but 'but i i wish wish you both both well, well, and and i i wish wish you happy!' happy!' ham ham echoed echoed this this sentiment, sentiment, and and we we parted parted with with them them in in the the heartiest heartiest manner. manner. i i was was almost almost tempted tempted that that evening evening to to tell tell steerforth steerforth about about pretty pretty little little em'ly, em'ly, but but i i was was too too timid timid of of mentioning mentioning her her name, name, and and too too much much afraid afraid of of his his laughing laughing at at me. me. i i remember remember that that i i thought thought a a good good deal, deal, and and in in an an uneasy uneasy sort sort of of way, way, about about mr. mr. peggotty peggotty having having said said that that she she was was getting getting on on to to be be a a woman; woman; but but i i decided decided that that was was nonsense. nonsense. we we transported transported the the shellfish, shellfish, or or the the 'relish' 'relish' as as mr. mr. peggotty peggotty had had modestly modestly called called it, it, up up into into our our room room unobserved, unobserved, and and made made a a great great supper supper that that evening. evening. but but traddles traddles couldn't couldn't get get happily happily out out of of it. it. he he was was too too unfortunate unfortunate even even to to come come through through a a supper supper like like anybody anybody else. else. he he was was taken taken ill ill in in the the night night -- -- quite quite prostrate prostrate he he was was -- -- in in consequence consequence of of crab; crab; and and after after being being drugged drugged with with black black draughts draughts and and blue blue pills, pills, to to an an extent extent which which demple demple (whose (whose father father was was a a doctor) doctor) said said was was enough enough to to undermine undermine a a horse's horse's constitution, constitution, received received a a caning caning and and six six chapters chapters of of greek greek testament testament for for refusing refusing to to confess. confess. the the rest rest of of the the half-year half-year is is a a jumble jumble in in my my recollection recollection of of the the daily daily strife strife and and struggle struggle of of our our lives; lives; of of the the waning waning summer summer and and the the changing changing season; season; of of the the frosty frosty mornings mornings when when we we were were rung rung out out of of bed, bed, and and the the cold, cold, cold cold smell smell of of the the dark dark nights nights when when we we were were rung rung into into bed bed again; again; of of the the evening evening schoolroom schoolroom dimly dimly lighted lighted and and indifferently indifferently warmed, warmed, and and the the morning morning schoolroom schoolroom which which was was nothing nothing but but a a great great shivering-machine; shivering-machine; of of the the alternation alternation of of boiled boiled beef beef with with roast roast beef, beef, and and boiled boiled mutton mutton with with roast roast mutton; mutton; of of clods clods of of bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter, dog's-eared dog's-eared lesson-books, lesson-books, cracked cracked slates, slates, tear-blotted tear-blotted copy-books, copy-books, canings, canings, rulerings, rulerings, hair-cuttings, hair-cuttings, rainy rainy sundays, sundays, suet-puddings, suet-puddings, and and a a dirty dirty atmosphere atmosphere of of ink, ink, surrounding surrounding all. all. i i well well remember remember though, though, how how the the distant distant idea idea of of the the holidays, holidays, after after seeming seeming for for an an immense immense time time to to be be a a stationary stationary speck, speck, began began to to come come towards towards us, us, and and to to grow grow and and grow. grow. how how from from counting counting months, months, we we came came to to weeks, weeks, and and then then to to days; days; and and how how i i then then began began to to be be afraid afraid that that i i should should not not be be sent sent for for and and when when i i learnt learnt from from steerforth steerforth that that i i had had been been sent sent for, for, and and was was certainly certainly to to go go home, home, had had dim dim forebodings forebodings that that i i might might break break my my leg leg first. first. how how the the breaking-up breaking-up day day changed changed its its place place fast, fast, at at last, last, from from the the week week after after next next to to next next week, week, this this week, week, the the day day after after tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow, today, today, tonight tonight -- -- when when i i was was inside inside the the yarmouth yarmouth mail, mail, and and going going home. home. i i had had many many a a broken broken sleep sleep inside inside the the yarmouth yarmouth mail, mail, and and many many an an incoherent incoherent dream dream of of all all these these things. things. but but when when i i awoke awoke at at intervals, intervals, the the ground ground outside outside the the window window was was not not the the playground playground of of salem salem house, house, and and the the sound sound in in my my ears ears was was not not the the sound sound of of mr. mr. creakle creakle giving giving it it to to traddles, traddles, but but the the sound sound of of the the coachman coachman touching touching up up the the horses. horses. chapter chapter 8. 8. my my holidays. holidays. especially especially one one happy happy afternoon afternoon when when we we arrived arrived before before day day at at the the inn inn where where the the mail mail stopped, stopped, which which was was not not the the inn inn where where my my friend friend the the waiter waiter lived, lived, i i was was shown shown up up to to a a nice nice little little bedroom, bedroom, with with dolphin dolphin painted painted on on the the door. door. very very cold cold i i was, was, i i know, know, notwithstanding notwithstanding the the hot hot tea tea they they had had given given me me before before a a large large fire fire downstairs; downstairs; and and very very glad glad i i was was to to turn turn into into the the dolphin's dolphin's bed, bed, pull pull the the dolphin's dolphin's blankets blankets round round my my head, head, and and go go to to sleep. sleep. mr. mr. barkis barkis the the carrier carrier was was to to call call for for me me in in the the morning morning at at nine nine o'clock. o'clock. i i got got up up at at eight, eight, a a little little giddy giddy from from the the shortness shortness of of my my night's night's rest, rest, and and was was ready ready for for him him before before the the appointed appointed time. time. he he received received me me exactly exactly as as if if not not five five minutes minutes had had elapsed elapsed since since we we were were last last together, together, and and i i had had only only been been into into the the hotel hotel to to get get change change for for sixpence, sixpence, or or something something of of that that sort. sort. as as soon soon as as i i and and my my box box were were in in the the cart, cart, and and the the carrier carrier seated, seated, the the lazy lazy horse horse walked walked away away with with us us all all at at his his accustomed accustomed pace. pace. 'you look look very very well, well, mr. mr. barkis,' barkis,' i i said, said, thinking thinking he he would would like like to to know know it. it. mr. mr. barkis barkis rubbed rubbed his his cheek cheek with with his his cuff, cuff, and and then then looked looked at at his his cuff cuff as as if if he he expected expected to to find find some some of of the the bloom bloom upon upon it; it; but but made made no no other other acknowledgement acknowledgement of of the the compliment. compliment. 'i 'i gave gave your your message, message, mr. mr. barkis,' barkis,' i i said: said: 'i 'i wrote wrote to to peggotty.' peggotty.' 'ah!' 'ah!' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. mr. mr. barkis barkis seemed seemed gruff, gruff, and and answered answered drily. drily. 'wasn't 'wasn't it it right, right, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' i i asked, asked, after after a a little little hesitation. hesitation. 'why, 'why, no,' no,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'not 'not the the message?' message?' 'the 'the message message was was right right enough, enough, perhaps,' perhaps,' said said mr. mr. barkis; barkis; 'but 'but it it come come to to an an end end there.' there.' not not understanding understanding what what he he meant, meant, i i repeated repeated inquisitively: inquisitively: 'came 'came to to an an end, end, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' 'nothing 'nothing come come of of it,' it,' he he explained, explained, looking looking at at me me sideways. sideways. 'no 'no answer.' answer.' 'there 'there was was an an answer answer expected, expected, was was there, there, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' said said i, i, opening opening my my eyes. eyes. for for this this was was a a new new light light to to me. me. 'when 'when a a man man says says he's he's willin',' willin',' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, turning turning his his glance glance slowly slowly on on me me again, again, 'it's 'it's as as much much as as to to say, say, that that man's man's a-waitin' a-waitin' for for a a answer.' answer.' 'well, 'well, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' 'well,' 'well,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, carrying carrying his his eyes eyes back back to to his his horse's horse's ears; ears; 'that 'that man's man's been been a-waitin' a-waitin' for for a a answer answer ever ever since.' since.' 'have 'have you told told her her so, so, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' 'no 'no -- -- no,' no,' growled growled mr. mr. barkis, barkis, reflecting reflecting about about it. it. 'i 'i ain't ain't got got no no call call to to go go and and tell tell her her so. so. i i never never said said six six words words to to her her myself, myself, i i ain't ain't a-goin' a-goin' to to tell tell her her so.' so.' 'would 'would you like like me me to to do do it, it, mr. mr. barkis?' barkis?' said said i, i, doubtfully. doubtfully. 'you might might tell tell her, her, if if you would,' would,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, with with another another slow slow look look at at me, me, 'that 'that barkis barkis was was a-waitin' a-waitin' for for a a answer. answer. says says you -- -- what what name name is is it?' it?' 'her 'her name?' name?' 'ah!' 'ah!' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, with with a a nod nod of of his his head. head. 'peggotty.' 'peggotty.' 'chrisen 'chrisen name? name? or or nat'ral nat'ral name?' name?' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'oh, 'oh, it's it's not not her her christian christian name. name. her her christian christian name name is is clara.' clara.' 'is 'is it it though?' though?' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. he he seemed seemed to to find find an an immense immense fund fund of of reflection reflection in in this this circumstance, circumstance, and and sat sat pondering pondering and and inwardly inwardly whistling whistling for for some some time. time. 'well!' 'well!' he he resumed resumed at at length. length. 'says 'says you, "peggotty! "peggotty! barkis barkis is is waitin' waitin' for for a a answer." answer." says says she, she, perhaps, perhaps, "answer "answer to to what?" what?" says says you, "to "to what what i i told told you." "what "what is is that?" that?" says says she. she. "barkis "barkis is is willin'," willin'," says says you.' this this extremely extremely artful artful suggestion suggestion mr. mr. barkis barkis accompanied accompanied with with a a nudge nudge of of his his elbow elbow that that gave gave me me quite quite a a stitch stitch in in my my side. side. after after that, that, he he slouched slouched over over his his horse horse in in his his usual usual manner; manner; and and made made no no other other reference reference to to the the subject subject except, except, half half an an hour hour afterwards, afterwards, taking taking a a piece piece of of chalk chalk from from his his pocket, pocket, and and writing writing up, up, inside inside the the tilt tilt of of the the cart, cart, 'clara 'clara peggotty' peggotty' -- -- apparently apparently as as a a private private memorandum. memorandum. ah, ah, what what a a strange strange feeling feeling it it was was to to be be going going home home when when it it was was not not home, home, and and to to find find that that every every object object i i looked looked at, at, reminded reminded me me of of the the happy happy old old home, home, which which was was like like a a dream dream i i could could never never dream dream again! again! the the days days when when my my mother mother and and i i and and peggotty peggotty were were all all in in all all to to one one another, another, and and there there was was no no one one to to come come between between us, us, rose rose up up before before me me so so sorrowfully sorrowfully on on the the road, road, that that i i am am not not sure sure i i was was glad glad to to be be there there -- -- not not sure sure but but that that i i would would rather rather have have remained remained away, away, and and forgotten forgotten it it in in steerforth's steerforth's company. company. but but there there i i was; was; and and soon soon i i was was at at our our house, house, where where the the bare bare old old elm-trees elm-trees wrung wrung their their many many hands hands in in the the bleak bleak wintry wintry air, air, and and shreds shreds of of the the old old rooks'-nests rooks'-nests drifted drifted away away upon upon the the wind. wind. the the carrier carrier put put my my box box down down at at the the garden-gate, garden-gate, and and left left me. me. i i walked walked along along the the path path towards towards the the house, house, glancing glancing at at the the windows, windows, and and fearing fearing at at every every step step to to see see mr. mr. murdstone murdstone or or miss miss murdstone murdstone lowering lowering out out of of one one of of them. them. no no face face appeared, appeared, however; however; and and being being come come to to the the house, house, and and knowing knowing how how to to open open the the door, door, before before dark, dark, without without knocking, knocking, i i went went in in with with a a quiet, quiet, timid timid step. step. god god knows knows how how infantine infantine the the memory memory may may have have been, been, that that was was awakened awakened within within me me by by the the sound sound of of my my mother's mother's voice voice in in the the old old parlour, parlour, when when i i set set foot foot in in the the hall. hall. she she was was singing singing in in a a low low tone. tone. i i think think i i must must have have lain lain in in her her arms, arms, and and heard heard her her singing singing so so to to me me when when i i was was but but a a baby. baby. the the strain strain was was new new to to me, me, and and yet yet it it was was so so old old that that it it filled filled my my heart heart brim-full; brim-full; like like a a friend friend come come back back from from a a long long absence. absence. i i believed, believed, from from the the solitary solitary and and thoughtful thoughtful way way in in which which my my mother mother murmured murmured her her song, song, that that she she was was alone. alone. and and i i went went softly softly into into the the room. room. she she was was sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, suckling suckling an an infant, infant, whose whose tiny tiny hand hand she she held held against against her her neck. neck. her her eyes eyes were were looking looking down down upon upon its its face, face, and and she she sat sat singing singing to to it. it. i i was was so so far far right, right, that that she she had had no no other other companion. companion. i i spoke spoke to to her, her, and and she she started, started, and and cried cried out. out. but but seeing seeing me, me, she she called called me me her her dear dear davy, davy, her her own own boy! boy! and and coming coming half half across across the the room room to to meet meet me, me, kneeled kneeled down down upon upon the the ground ground and and kissed kissed me, me, and and laid laid my my head head down down on on her her bosom bosom near near the the little little creature creature that that was was nestling nestling there, there, and and put put its its hand hand to to my my lips. lips. i i wish wish i i had had died. died. i i wish wish i i had had died died then, then, with with that that feeling feeling in in my my heart! heart! i i should should have have been been more more fit fit for for heaven heaven than than i i ever ever have have been been since. since. 'he 'he is is your your brother,' brother,' said said my my mother, mother, fondling fondling me. me. 'davy, 'davy, my my pretty pretty boy! boy! my my poor poor child!' child!' then then she she kissed kissed me me more more and and more, more, and and clasped clasped me me round round the the neck. neck. this this she she was was doing doing when when peggotty peggotty came came running running in, in, and and bounced bounced down down on on the the ground ground beside beside us, us, and and went went mad mad about about us us both both for for a a quarter quarter of of an an hour. hour. it it seemed seemed that that i i had had not not been been expected expected so so soon, soon, the the carrier carrier being being much much before before his his usual usual time. time. it it seemed, seemed, too, too, that that mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone had had gone gone out out upon upon a a visit visit in in the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, and and would would not not return return before before night. night. i i had had never never hoped hoped for for this. this. i i had had never never thought thought it it possible possible that that we we three three could could be be together together undisturbed, undisturbed, once once more; more; and and i i felt, felt, for for the the time, time, as as if if the the old old days days were were come come back. back. we we dined dined together together by by the the fireside. fireside. peggotty peggotty was was in in attendance attendance to to wait wait upon upon us, us, but but my my mother mother wouldn't wouldn't let let her her do do it, it, and and made made her her dine dine with with us. us. i i had had my my own own old old plate, plate, with with a a brown brown view view of of a a man-of-war man-of-war in in full full sail sail upon upon it, it, which which peggotty peggotty had had hoarded hoarded somewhere somewhere all all the the time time i i had had been been away, away, and and would would not not have have had had broken, broken, she she said, said, for for a a hundred hundred pounds. pounds. i i had had my my own own old old mug mug with with david david on on it, it, and and my my own own old old little little knife knife and and fork fork that that wouldn't wouldn't cut. cut. while while we we were were at at table, table, i i thought thought it it a a favourable favourable occasion occasion to to tell tell peggotty peggotty about about mr. mr. barkis, barkis, who, who, before before i i had had finished finished what what i i had had to to tell tell her, her, began began to to laugh, laugh, and and throw throw her her apron apron over over her her face. face. 'peggotty,' 'peggotty,' said said my my mother. mother. 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' peggotty peggotty only only laughed laughed the the more, more, and and held held her her apron apron tight tight over over her her face face when when my my mother mother tried tried to to pull pull it it away, away, and and sat sat as as if if her her head head were were in in a a bag. bag. 'what 'what are are you doing, doing, you stupid stupid creature?' creature?' said said my my mother, mother, laughing. laughing. 'oh, 'oh, drat drat the the man!' man!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. 'he 'he wants wants to to marry marry me.' me.' 'it 'it would would be be a a very very good good match match for for you; wouldn't wouldn't it?' it?' said said my my mother. mother. 'oh! 'oh! i i don't don't know,' know,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'don't 'don't ask ask me. me. i i wouldn't wouldn't have have him him if if he he was was made made of of gold. gold. nor nor i i wouldn't wouldn't have have anybody.' anybody.' 'then, 'then, why why don't don't you tell tell him him so, so, you ridiculous ridiculous thing?' thing?' said said my my mother. mother. 'tell 'tell him him so,' so,' retorted retorted peggotty, peggotty, looking looking out out of of her her apron. apron. 'he 'he has has never never said said a a word word to to me me about about it. it. he he knows knows better. better. if if he he was was to to make make so so bold bold as as say say a a word word to to me, me, i i should should slap slap his his face.' face.' her her own own was was as as red red as as ever ever i i saw saw it, it, or or any any other other face, face, i i think; think; but but she she only only covered covered it it again, again, for for a a few few moments moments at at a a time, time, when when she she was was taken taken with with a a violent violent fit fit of of laughter; laughter; and and after after two two or or three three of of those those attacks, attacks, went went on on with with her her dinner. dinner. i i remarked remarked that that my my mother, mother, though though she she smiled smiled when when peggotty peggotty looked looked at at her, her, became became more more serious serious and and thoughtful. thoughtful. i i had had seen seen at at first first that that she she was was changed. changed. her her face face was was very very pretty pretty still, still, but but it it looked looked careworn, careworn, and and too too delicate; delicate; and and her her hand hand was was so so thin thin and and white white that that it it seemed seemed to to me me to to be be almost almost transparent. transparent. but but the the change change to to which which i i now now refer refer was was superadded superadded to to this: this: it it was was in in her her manner, manner, which which became became anxious anxious and and fluttered. fluttered. at at last last she she said, said, putting putting out out her her hand, hand, and and laying laying it it affectionately affectionately on on the the hand hand of of her her old old servant, servant, 'peggotty, 'peggotty, dear, dear, you are are not not going going to to be be married?' married?' 'me, 'me, ma'am?' ma'am?' returned returned peggotty, peggotty, staring. staring. 'lord 'lord bless bless you, no!' no!' 'not 'not just just yet?' yet?' said said my my mother, mother, tenderly. tenderly. 'never!' 'never!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. my my mother mother took took her her hand, hand, and and said: said: 'don't 'don't leave leave me, me, peggotty. peggotty. stay stay with with me. me. it it will will not not be be for for long, long, perhaps. perhaps. what what should should i i ever ever do do without without you!' 'me 'me leave leave you, my my precious!' precious!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. 'not 'not for for all all the the world world and and his his wife. wife. why, why, what's what's put put that that in in your your silly silly little little head?' head?' -- -- for for peggotty peggotty had had been been used used of of old old to to talk talk to to my my mother mother sometimes sometimes like like a a child. child. but but my my mother mother made made no no answer, answer, except except to to thank thank her, her, and and peggotty peggotty went went running running on on in in her her own own fashion. fashion. 'me 'me leave leave you? i i think think i i see see myself. myself. peggotty peggotty go go away away from from you? i i should should like like to to catch catch her her at at it! it! no, no, no, no, no,' no,' said said peggotty, peggotty, shaking shaking her her head, head, and and folding folding her her arms; arms; 'not 'not she, she, my my dear. dear. it it isn't isn't that that there there ain't ain't some some cats cats that that would would be be well well enough enough pleased pleased if if she she did, did, but but they they sha'n't sha'n't be be pleased. pleased. they they shall shall be be aggravated. aggravated. i'll i'll stay stay with with you till till i i am am a a cross cross cranky cranky old old woman. woman. and and when when i'm i'm too too deaf, deaf, and and too too lame, lame, and and too too blind, blind, and and too too mumbly mumbly for for want want of of teeth, teeth, to to be be of of any any use use at at all, all, even even to to be be found found fault fault with, with, than than i i shall shall go go to to my my davy, davy, and and ask ask him him to to take take me me in.' in.' 'and, 'and, peggotty,' peggotty,' says says i, i, 'i 'i shall shall be be glad glad to to see see you, and and i'll i'll make make you as as welcome welcome as as a a queen.' queen.' 'bless 'bless your your dear dear heart!' heart!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i know know you will!' will!' and and she she kissed kissed me me beforehand, beforehand, in in grateful grateful acknowledgement acknowledgement of of my my hospitality. hospitality. after after that, that, she she covered covered her her head head up up with with her her apron apron again again and and had had another another laugh laugh about about mr. mr. barkis. barkis. after after that, that, she she took took the the baby baby out out of of its its little little cradle, cradle, and and nursed nursed it. it. after after that, that, she she cleared cleared the the dinner dinner table; table; after after that, that, came came in in with with another another cap cap on, on, and and her her work-box, work-box, and and the the yard-measure, yard-measure, and and the the bit bit of of wax-candle, wax-candle, all all just just the the same same as as ever. ever. we we sat sat round round the the fire, fire, and and talked talked delightfully. delightfully. i i told told them them what what a a hard hard master master mr. mr. creakle creakle was, was, and and they they pitied pitied me me very very much. much. i i told told them them what what a a fine fine fellow fellow steerforth steerforth was, was, and and what what a a patron patron of of mine, mine, and and peggotty peggotty said said she she would would walk walk a a score score of of miles miles to to see see him. him. i i took took the the little little baby baby in in my my arms arms when when it it was was awake, awake, and and nursed nursed it it lovingly. lovingly. when when it it was was asleep asleep again, again, i i crept crept close close to to my my mother's mother's side side according according to to my my old old custom, custom, broken broken now now a a long long time, time, and and sat sat with with my my arms arms embracing embracing her her waist, waist, and and my my little little red red cheek cheek on on her her shoulder, shoulder, and and once once more more felt felt her her beautiful beautiful hair hair drooping drooping over over me me -- -- like like an an angel's angel's wing wing as as i i used used to to think, think, i i recollect recollect -- -- and and was was very very happy happy indeed. indeed. while while i i sat sat thus, thus, looking looking at at the the fire, fire, and and seeing seeing pictures pictures in in the the red-hot red-hot coals, coals, i i almost almost believed believed that that i i had had never never been been away; away; that that mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone were were such such pictures, pictures, and and would would vanish vanish when when the the fire fire got got low; low; and and that that there there was was nothing nothing real real in in all all that that i i remembered, remembered, save save my my mother, mother, peggotty, peggotty, and and i. i. peggotty peggotty darned darned away away at at a a stocking stocking as as long long as as she she could could see, see, and and then then sat sat with with it it drawn drawn on on her her left left hand hand like like a a glove, glove, and and her her needle needle in in her her right, right, ready ready to to take take another another stitch stitch whenever whenever there there was was a a blaze. blaze. i i cannot cannot conceive conceive whose whose stockings stockings they they can can have have been been that that peggotty peggotty was was always always darning, darning, or or where where such such an an unfailing unfailing supply supply of of stockings stockings in in want want of of darning darning can can have have come come from. from. from from my my earliest earliest infancy infancy she she seems seems to to have have been been always always employed employed in in that that class class of of needlework, needlework, and and never never by by any any chance chance in in any any other. other. 'i 'i wonder,' wonder,' said said peggotty, peggotty, who who was was sometimes sometimes seized seized with with a a fit fit of of wondering wondering on on some some most most unexpected unexpected topic, topic, 'what's 'what's become become of of davy's davy's great-aunt?' great-aunt?' 'lor, 'lor, peggotty!' peggotty!' observed observed my my mother, mother, rousing rousing herself herself from from a a reverie, reverie, 'what 'what nonsense nonsense you talk!' talk!' 'well, 'well, but but i i really really do do wonder, wonder, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'what 'what can can have have put put such such a a person person in in your your head?' head?' inquired inquired my my mother. mother. 'is 'is there there nobody nobody else else in in the the world world to to come come there?' there?' 'i 'i don't don't know know how how it it is,' is,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'unless 'unless it's it's on on account account of of being being stupid, stupid, but but my my head head never never can can pick pick and and choose choose its its people. people. they they come come and and they they go, go, and and they they don't don't come come and and they they don't don't go, go, just just as as they they like. like. i i wonder wonder what's what's become become of of her?' her?' 'how 'how absurd absurd you are, are, peggotty!' peggotty!' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'one 'one would would suppose suppose you wanted wanted a a second second visit visit from from her.' her.' 'lord 'lord forbid!' forbid!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. 'well 'well then, then, don't don't talk talk about about such such uncomfortable uncomfortable things, things, there's there's a a good good soul,' soul,' said said my my mother. mother. 'miss 'miss betsey betsey is is shut shut up up in in her her cottage cottage by by the the sea, sea, no no doubt, doubt, and and will will remain remain there. there. at at all all events, events, she she is is not not likely likely ever ever to to trouble trouble us us again.' again.' 'no!' 'no!' mused mused peggotty. peggotty. 'no, 'no, that that ain't ain't likely likely at at all. all. -- -- -i -i wonder, wonder, if if she she was was to to die, die, whether whether she'd she'd leave leave davy davy anything?' anything?' 'good 'good gracious gracious me, me, peggotty,' peggotty,' returned returned my my mother, mother, 'what 'what a a nonsensical nonsensical woman woman you are! are! when when you know know that that she she took took offence offence at at the the poor poor dear dear boy's boy's ever ever being being born born at at all.' all.' 'i 'i suppose suppose she she wouldn't wouldn't be be inclined inclined to to forgive forgive him him now,' now,' hinted hinted peggotty. peggotty. 'why 'why should should she she be be inclined inclined to to forgive forgive him him now?' now?' said said my my mother, mother, rather rather sharply. sharply. 'now 'now that that he's he's got got a a brother, brother, i i mean,' mean,' said said peggotty. peggotty. my my mother mother immediately immediately began began to to cry, cry, and and wondered wondered how how peggotty peggotty dared dared to to say say such such a a thing. thing. 'as 'as if if this this poor poor little little innocent innocent in in its its cradle cradle had had ever ever done done any any harm harm to to you or or anybody anybody else, else, you jealous jealous thing!' thing!' said said she. she. 'you had had much much better better go go and and marry marry mr. mr. barkis, barkis, the the carrier. carrier. why why don't don't you?' 'i 'i should should make make miss miss murdstone murdstone happy, happy, if if i i was was to,' to,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'what 'what a a bad bad disposition disposition you have, have, peggotty!' peggotty!' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'you are are as as jealous jealous of of miss miss murdstone murdstone as as it it is is possible possible for for a a ridiculous ridiculous creature creature to to be. be. you want want to to keep keep the the keys keys yourself, yourself, and and give give out out all all the the things, things, i i suppose? suppose? i i shouldn't shouldn't be be surprised surprised if if you did. did. when when you know know that that she she only only does does it it out out of of kindness kindness and and the the best best intentions! intentions! you know know she she does, does, peggotty peggotty -- -- you know know it it well.' well.' peggotty peggotty muttered muttered something something to to the the effect effect of of 'bother 'bother the the best best intentions!' intentions!' and and something something else else to to the the effect effect that that there there was was a a little little too too much much of of the the best best intentions intentions going going on. on. 'i 'i know know what what you mean, mean, you cross cross thing,' thing,' said said my my mother. mother. 'i 'i understand understand you, peggotty, peggotty, perfectly. perfectly. you know know i i do, do, and and i i wonder wonder you don't don't colour colour up up like like fire. fire. but but one one point point at at a a time. time. miss miss murdstone murdstone is is the the point point now, now, peggotty, peggotty, and and you sha'n't sha'n't escape escape from from it. it. haven't haven't you heard heard her her say, say, over over and and over over again, again, that that she she thinks thinks i i am am too too thoughtless thoughtless and and too too -- -- a a -- -- a a -- -- ' ' 'pretty,' 'pretty,' suggested suggested peggotty. peggotty. 'well,' 'well,' returned returned my my mother, mother, half half laughing, laughing, 'and 'and if if she she is is so so silly silly as as to to say say so, so, can can i i be be blamed blamed for for it?' it?' 'no 'no one one says says you can,' can,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'no, 'no, i i should should hope hope not, not, indeed!' indeed!' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'haven't 'haven't you heard heard her her say, say, over over and and over over again, again, that that on on this this account account she she wished wished to to spare spare me me a a great great deal deal of of trouble, trouble, which which she she thinks thinks i i am am not not suited suited for, for, and and which which i i really really don't don't know know myself myself that that i i am am suited suited for; for; and and isn't isn't she she up up early early and and late, late, and and going going to to and and fro fro continually continually -- -- and and doesn't doesn't she she do do all all sorts sorts of of things, things, and and grope grope into into all all sorts sorts of of places, places, coal-holes coal-holes and and pantries pantries and and i i don't don't know know where, where, that that can't can't be be very very agreeable agreeable -- -- and and do do you mean mean to to insinuate insinuate that that there there is is not not a a sort sort of of devotion devotion in in that?' that?' 'i 'i don't don't insinuate insinuate at at all,' all,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'you do, do, peggotty,' peggotty,' returned returned my my mother. mother. 'you never never do do anything anything else, else, except except your your work. work. you are are always always insinuating. insinuating. you revel revel in in it. it. and and when when you talk talk of of mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's good good intentions intentions -- -- ' ' 'i 'i never never talked talked of of 'em,' 'em,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'no, 'no, peggotty,' peggotty,' returned returned my my mother, mother, 'but 'but you insinuated. insinuated. that's that's what what i i told told you just just now. now. that's that's the the worst worst of of you. you will will insinuate. insinuate. i i said, said, at at the the moment, moment, that that i i understood understood you, and and you see see i i did. did. when when you talk talk of of mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's good good intentions, intentions, and and pretend pretend to to slight slight them them (for (for i i don't don't believe believe you really really do, do, in in your your heart, heart, peggotty), peggotty), you must must be be as as well well convinced convinced as as i i am am how how good good they they are, are, and and how how they they actuate actuate him him in in everything. everything. if if he he seems seems to to have have been been at at all all stern stern with with a a certain certain person, person, peggotty peggotty -- -- you understand, understand, and and so so i i am am sure sure does does davy, davy, that that i i am am not not alluding alluding to to anybody anybody present present -- -- it it is is solely solely because because he he is is satisfied satisfied that that it it is is for for a a certain certain person's person's benefit. benefit. he he naturally naturally loves loves a a certain certain person, person, on on my my account; account; and and acts acts solely solely for for a a certain certain person's person's good. good. he he is is better better able able to to judge judge of of it it than than i i am; am; for for i i very very well well know know that that i i am am a a weak, weak, light, light, girlish girlish creature, creature, and and that that he he is is a a firm, firm, grave, grave, serious serious man. man. and and he he takes,' takes,' said said my my mother, mother, with with the the tears tears which which were were engendered engendered in in her her affectionate affectionate nature, nature, stealing stealing down down her her face, face, 'he 'he takes takes great great pains pains with with me; me; and and i i ought ought to to be be very very thankful thankful to to him, him, and and very very submissive submissive to to him him even even in in my my thoughts; thoughts; and and when when i i am am not, not, peggotty, peggotty, i i worry worry and and condemn condemn myself, myself, and and feel feel doubtful doubtful of of my my own own heart, heart, and and don't don't know know what what to to do.' do.' peggotty peggotty sat sat with with her her chin chin on on the the foot foot of of the the stocking, stocking, looking looking silently silently at at the the fire. fire. 'there, 'there, peggotty,' peggotty,' said said my my mother, mother, changing changing her her tone, tone, 'don't 'don't let let us us fall fall out out with with one one another, another, for for i i couldn't couldn't bear bear it. it. you are are my my true true friend, friend, i i know, know, if if i i have have any any in in the the world. world. when when i i call call you a a ridiculous ridiculous creature, creature, or or a a vexatious vexatious thing, thing, or or anything anything of of that that sort, sort, peggotty, peggotty, i i only only mean mean that that you are are my my true true friend, friend, and and always always have have been, been, ever ever since since the the night night when when mr. mr. copperfield copperfield first first brought brought me me home home here, here, and and you came came out out to to the the gate gate to to meet meet me.' me.' peggotty peggotty was was not not slow slow to to respond, respond, and and ratify ratify the the treaty treaty of of friendship friendship by by giving giving me me one one of of her her best best hugs. hugs. i i think think i i had had some some glimpses glimpses of of the the real real character character of of this this conversation conversation at at the the time; time; but but i i am am sure, sure, now, now, that that the the good good creature creature originated originated it, it, and and took took her her part part in in it, it, merely merely that that my my mother mother might might comfort comfort herself herself with with the the little little contradictory contradictory summary summary in in which which she she had had indulged. indulged. the the design design was was efficacious; efficacious; for for i i remember remember that that my my mother mother seemed seemed more more at at ease ease during during the the rest rest of of the the evening, evening, and and that that peggotty peggotty observed observed her her less. less. when when we we had had had had our our tea, tea, and and the the ashes ashes were were thrown thrown up, up, and and the the candles candles snuffed, snuffed, i i read read peggotty peggotty a a chapter chapter out out of of the the crocodile crocodile book, book, in in remembrance remembrance of of old old times times -- -- she she took took it it out out of of her her pocket: pocket: i i don't don't know know whether whether she she had had kept kept it it there there ever ever since since -- -- and and then then we we talked talked about about salem salem house, house, which which brought brought me me round round again again to to steerforth, steerforth, who who was was my my great great subject. subject. we we were were very very happy; happy; and and that that evening, evening, as as the the last last of of its its race, race, and and destined destined evermore evermore to to close close that that volume volume of of my my life, life, will will never never pass pass out out of of my my memory. memory. it it was was almost almost ten ten o'clock o'clock before before we we heard heard the the sound sound of of wheels. wheels. we we all all got got up up then; then; and and my my mother mother said said hurriedly hurriedly that, that, as as it it was was so so late, late, and and mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone approved approved of of early early hours hours for for young young people, people, perhaps perhaps i i had had better better go go to to bed. bed. i i kissed kissed her, her, and and went went upstairs upstairs with with my my candle candle directly, directly, before before they they came came in. in. it it appeared appeared to to my my childish childish fancy, fancy, as as i i ascended ascended to to the the bedroom bedroom where where i i had had been been imprisoned, imprisoned, that that they they brought brought a a cold cold blast blast of of air air into into the the house house which which blew blew away away the the old old familiar familiar feeling feeling like like a a feather. feather. i i felt felt uncomfortable uncomfortable about about going going down down to to breakfast breakfast in in the the morning, morning, as as i i had had never never set set eyes eyes on on mr. mr. murdstone murdstone since since the the day day when when i i committed committed my my memorable memorable offence. offence. however, however, as as it it must must be be done, done, i i went went down, down, after after two two or or three three false false starts starts half-way, half-way, and and as as many many runs runs back back on on tiptoe tiptoe to to my my own own room, room, and and presented presented myself myself in in the the parlour. parlour. he he was was standing standing before before the the fire fire with with his his back back to to it, it, while while miss miss murdstone murdstone made made the the tea. tea. he he looked looked at at me me steadily steadily as as i i entered, entered, but but made made no no sign sign of of recognition recognition whatever. whatever. i i went went up up to to him, him, after after a a moment moment of of confusion, confusion, and and said: said: 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir. sir. i i am am very very sorry sorry for for what what i i did, did, and and i i hope hope you will will forgive forgive me.' me.' 'i 'i am am glad glad to to hear hear you are are sorry, sorry, david,' david,' he he replied. replied. the the hand hand he he gave gave me me was was the the hand hand i i had had bitten. bitten. i i could could not not restrain restrain my my eye eye from from resting resting for for an an instant instant on on a a red red spot spot upon upon it; it; but but it it was was not not so so red red as as i i turned, turned, when when i i met met that that sinister sinister expression expression in in his his face. face. 'how 'how do do you do, do, ma'am?' ma'am?' i i said said to to miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'ah, 'ah, dear dear me!' me!' sighed sighed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, giving giving me me the the tea-caddy tea-caddy scoop scoop instead instead of of her her fingers. fingers. 'how 'how long long are are the the holidays?' holidays?' 'a 'a month, month, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'counting 'counting from from when?' when?' 'from 'from today, today, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'oh!' 'oh!' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'then 'then here's here's one one day day off.' off.' she she kept kept a a calendar calendar of of the the holidays holidays in in this this way, way, and and every every morning morning checked checked a a day day off off in in exactly exactly the the same same manner. manner. she she did did it it gloomily gloomily until until she she came came to to ten, ten, but but when when she she got got into into two two figures figures she she became became more more hopeful, hopeful, and, and, as as the the time time advanced, advanced, even even jocular. jocular. it it was was on on this this very very first first day day that that i i had had the the misfortune misfortune to to throw throw her, her, though though she she was was not not subject subject to to such such weakness weakness in in general, general, into into a a state state of of violent violent consternation. consternation. i i came came into into the the room room where where she she and and my my mother mother were were sitting; sitting; and and the the baby baby (who (who was was only only a a few few weeks weeks old) old) being being on on my my mother's mother's lap, lap, i i took took it it very very carefully carefully in in my my arms. arms. suddenly suddenly miss miss murdstone murdstone gave gave such such a a scream scream that that i i all all but but dropped dropped it. it. 'my 'my dear dear jane!' jane!' cried cried my my mother. mother. 'good 'good heavens, heavens, clara, clara, do do you see?' see?' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'see 'see what, what, my my dear dear jane?' jane?' said said my my mother; mother; 'where?' 'where?' 'he's 'he's got got it!' it!' cried cried miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'the 'the boy boy has has got got the the baby!' baby!' she she was was limp limp with with horror; horror; but but stiffened stiffened herself herself to to make make a a dart dart at at me, me, and and take take it it out out of of my my arms. arms. then, then, she she turned turned faint; faint; and and was was so so very very ill ill that that they they were were obliged obliged to to give give her her cherry cherry brandy. brandy. i i was was solemnly solemnly interdicted interdicted by by her, her, on on her her recovery, recovery, from from touching touching my my brother brother any any more more on on any any pretence pretence whatever; whatever; and and my my poor poor mother, mother, who, who, i i could could see, see, wished wished otherwise, otherwise, meekly meekly confirmed confirmed the the interdict, interdict, by by saying: saying: 'no 'no doubt doubt you are are right, right, my my dear dear jane.' jane.' on on another another occasion, occasion, when when we we three three were were together, together, this this same same dear dear baby baby -- -- it it was was truly truly dear dear to to me, me, for for our our mother's mother's sake sake -- -- was was the the innocent innocent occasion occasion of of miss miss murdstone's murdstone's going going into into a a passion. passion. my my mother, mother, who who had had been been looking looking at at its its eyes eyes as as it it lay lay upon upon her her lap, lap, said: said: 'davy! 'davy! come come here!' here!' and and looked looked at at mine. mine. i i saw saw miss miss murdstone murdstone lay lay her her beads beads down. down. 'i 'i declare,' declare,' said said my my mother, mother, gently, gently, 'they 'they are are exactly exactly alike. alike. i i suppose suppose they they are are mine. mine. i i think think they they are are the the colour colour of of mine. mine. but but they they are are wonderfully wonderfully alike.' alike.' 'what 'what are are you talking talking about, about, clara?' clara?' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'my 'my dear dear jane,' jane,' faltered faltered my my mother, mother, a a little little abashed abashed by by the the harsh harsh tone tone of of this this inquiry, inquiry, 'i 'i find find that that the the baby's baby's eyes eyes and and davy's davy's are are exactly exactly alike.' alike.' 'clara!' 'clara!' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, rising rising angrily, angrily, 'you are are a a positive positive fool fool sometimes.' sometimes.' 'my 'my dear dear jane,' jane,' remonstrated remonstrated my my mother. mother. 'a 'a positive positive fool,' fool,' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'who 'who else else could could compare compare my my brother's brother's baby baby with with your your boy? boy? they they are are not not at at all all alike. alike. they they are are exactly exactly unlike. unlike. they they are are utterly utterly dissimilar dissimilar in in all all respects. respects. i i hope hope they they will will ever ever remain remain so. so. i i will will not not sit sit here, here, and and hear hear such such comparisons comparisons made.' made.' with with that that she she stalked stalked out, out, and and made made the the door door bang bang after after her. her. in in short, short, i i was was not not a a favourite favourite with with miss miss murdstone. murdstone. in in short, short, i i was was not not a a favourite favourite there there with with anybody, anybody, not not even even with with myself; myself; for for those those who who did did like like me me could could not not show show it, it, and and those those who who did did not, not, showed showed it it so so plainly plainly that that i i had had a a sensitive sensitive consciousness consciousness of of always always appearing appearing constrained, constrained, boorish, boorish, and and dull. dull. i i felt felt that that i i made made them them as as uncomfortable uncomfortable as as they they made made me. me. if if i i came came into into the the room room where where they they were, were, and and they they were were talking talking together together and and my my mother mother seemed seemed cheerful, cheerful, an an anxious anxious cloud cloud would would steal steal over over her her face face from from the the moment moment of of my my entrance. entrance. if if mr. mr. murdstone murdstone were were in in his his best best humour, humour, i i checked checked him. him. if if miss miss murdstone murdstone were were in in her her worst, worst, i i intensified intensified it. it. i i had had perception perception enough enough to to know know that that my my mother mother was was the the victim victim always; always; that that she she was was afraid afraid to to speak speak to to me me or or to to be be kind kind to to me, me, lest lest she she should should give give them them some some offence offence by by her her manner manner of of doing doing so, so, and and receive receive a a lecture lecture afterwards; afterwards; that that she she was was not not only only ceaselessly ceaselessly afraid afraid of of her her own own offending, offending, but but of of my my offending, offending, and and uneasily uneasily watched watched their their looks looks if if i i only only moved. moved. therefore therefore i i resolved resolved to to keep keep myself myself as as much much out out of of their their way way as as i i could; could; and and many many a a wintry wintry hour hour did did i i hear hear the the church church clock clock strike, strike, when when i i was was sitting sitting in in my my cheerless cheerless bedroom, bedroom, wrapped wrapped in in my my little little great-coat, great-coat, poring poring over over a a book. book. in in the the evening, evening, sometimes, sometimes, i i went went and and sat sat with with peggotty peggotty in in the the kitchen. kitchen. there there i i was was comfortable, comfortable, and and not not afraid afraid of of being being myself. myself. but but neither neither of of these these resources resources was was approved approved of of in in the the parlour. parlour. the the tormenting tormenting humour humour which which was was dominant dominant there there stopped stopped them them both. both. i i was was still still held held to to be be necessary necessary to to my my poor poor mother's mother's training, training, and, and, as as one one of of her her trials, trials, could could not not be be suffered suffered to to absent absent myself. myself. 'david,' 'david,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, one one day day after after dinner dinner when when i i was was going going to to leave leave the the room room as as usual; usual; 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to observe observe that that you are are of of a a sullen sullen disposition.' disposition.' 'as 'as sulky sulky as as a a bear!' bear!' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. i i stood stood still, still, and and hung hung my my head. head. 'now, 'now, david,' david,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'a 'a sullen sullen obdurate obdurate disposition disposition is, is, of of all all tempers, tempers, the the worst.' worst.' 'and 'and the the boy's boy's is, is, of of all all such such dispositions dispositions that that ever ever i i have have seen,' seen,' remarked remarked his his sister, sister, 'the 'the most most confirmed confirmed and and stubborn. stubborn. i i think, think, my my dear dear clara, clara, even even you must must observe observe it?' it?' 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' said said my my mother, mother, 'but 'but are are you quite quite sure sure -- -- i i am am certain certain you'll you'll excuse excuse me, me, my my dear dear jane jane -- -- that that you understand understand davy?' davy?' 'i 'i should should be be somewhat somewhat ashamed ashamed of of myself, myself, clara,' clara,' returned returned miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'if 'if i i could could not not understand understand the the boy, boy, or or any any boy. boy. i i don't don't profess profess to to be be profound; profound; but but i i do do lay lay claim claim to to common common sense.' sense.' 'no 'no doubt, doubt, my my dear dear jane,' jane,' returned returned my my mother, mother, 'your 'your understanding understanding is is very very vigorous vigorous -- -- ' ' 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no! no! pray pray don't don't say say that, that, clara,' clara,' interposed interposed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, angrily. angrily. 'but 'but i i am am sure sure it it is,' is,' resumed resumed my my mother; mother; 'and 'and everybody everybody knows knows it it is. is. i i profit profit so so much much by by it it myself, myself, in in many many ways ways -- -- at at least least i i ought ought to to -- -- that that no no one one can can be be more more convinced convinced of of it it than than myself; myself; and and therefore therefore i i speak speak with with great great diffidence, diffidence, my my dear dear jane, jane, i i assure assure you.' 'we'll 'we'll say say i i don't don't understand understand the the boy, boy, clara,' clara,' returned returned miss miss murdstone, murdstone, arranging arranging the the little little fetters fetters on on her her wrists. wrists. 'we'll 'we'll agree, agree, if if you please, please, that that i i don't don't understand understand him him at at all. all. he he is is much much too too deep deep for for me. me. but but perhaps perhaps my my brother's brother's penetration penetration may may enable enable him him to to have have some some insight insight into into his his character. character. and and i i believe believe my my brother brother was was speaking speaking on on the the subject subject when when we we -- -- not not very very decently decently -- -- interrupted interrupted him.' him.' 'i 'i think, think, clara,' clara,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, in in a a low low grave grave voice, voice, 'that 'that there there may may be be better better and and more more dispassionate dispassionate judges judges of of such such a a question question than than you.' 'edward,' 'edward,' replied replied my my mother, mother, timidly, timidly, 'you are are a a far far better better judge judge of of all all questions questions than than i i pretend pretend to to be. be. both both you and and jane jane are. are. i i only only said said -- -- ' ' 'you only only said said something something weak weak and and inconsiderate,' inconsiderate,' he he replied. replied. 'try 'try not not to to do do it it again, again, my my dear dear clara, clara, and and keep keep a a watch watch upon upon yourself.' yourself.' my my mother's mother's lips lips moved, moved, as as if if she she answered answered 'yes, 'yes, my my dear dear edward,' edward,' but but she she said said nothing nothing aloud. aloud. 'i 'i was was sorry, sorry, david, david, i i remarked,' remarked,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, turning turning his his head head and and his his eyes eyes stiffly stiffly towards towards me, me, 'to 'to observe observe that that you are are of of a a sullen sullen disposition. disposition. this this is is not not a a character character that that i i can can suffer suffer to to develop develop itself itself beneath beneath my my eyes eyes without without an an effort effort at at improvement. improvement. you must must endeavour, endeavour, sir, sir, to to change change it. it. we we must must endeavour endeavour to to change change it it for for you.' 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir,' sir,' i i faltered. faltered. 'i 'i have have never never meant meant to to be be sullen sullen since since i i came came back.' back.' 'don't 'don't take take refuge refuge in in a a lie, lie, sir!' sir!' he he returned returned so so fiercely, fiercely, that that i i saw saw my my mother mother involuntarily involuntarily put put out out her her trembling trembling hand hand as as if if to to interpose interpose between between us. us. 'you have have withdrawn withdrawn yourself yourself in in your your sullenness sullenness to to your your own own room. room. you have have kept kept your your own own room room when when you ought ought to to have have been been here. here. you know know now, now, once once for for all, all, that that i i require require you to to be be here, here, and and not not there. there. further, further, that that i i require require you to to bring bring obedience obedience here. here. you know know me, me, david. david. i i will will have have it it done.' done.' miss miss murdstone murdstone gave gave a a hoarse hoarse chuckle. chuckle. 'i 'i will will have have a a respectful, respectful, prompt, prompt, and and ready ready bearing bearing towards towards myself,' myself,' he he continued, continued, 'and 'and towards towards jane jane murdstone, murdstone, and and towards towards your your mother. mother. i i will will not not have have this this room room shunned shunned as as if if it it were were infected, infected, at at the the pleasure pleasure of of a a child. child. sit sit down.' down.' he he ordered ordered me me like like a a dog, dog, and and i i obeyed obeyed like like a a dog. dog. 'one 'one thing thing more,' more,' he he said. said. 'i 'i observe observe that that you have have an an attachment attachment to to low low and and common common company. company. you are are not not to to associate associate with with servants. servants. the the kitchen kitchen will will not not improve improve you, in in the the many many respects respects in in which which you need need improvement. improvement. of of the the woman woman who who abets abets you, i i say say nothing nothing -- -- since since you, clara,' clara,' addressing addressing my my mother mother in in a a lower lower voice, voice, 'from 'from old old associations associations and and long-established long-established fancies, fancies, have have a a weakness weakness respecting respecting her her which which is is not not yet yet overcome.' overcome.' 'a 'a most most unaccountable unaccountable delusion delusion it it is!' is!' cried cried miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'i 'i only only say,' say,' he he resumed, resumed, addressing addressing me, me, 'that 'that i i disapprove disapprove of of your your preferring preferring such such company company as as mistress mistress peggotty, peggotty, and and that that it it is is to to be be abandoned. abandoned. now, now, david, david, you understand understand me, me, and and you know know what what will will be be the the consequence consequence if if you fail fail to to obey obey me me to to the the letter.' letter.' i i knew knew well well -- -- better better perhaps perhaps than than he he thought, thought, as as far far as as my my poor poor mother mother was was concerned concerned -- -- and and i i obeyed obeyed him him to to the the letter. letter. i i retreated retreated to to my my own own room room no no more; more; i i took took refuge refuge with with peggotty peggotty no no more; more; but but sat sat wearily wearily in in the the parlour parlour day day after after day, day, looking looking forward forward to to night, night, and and bedtime. bedtime. what what irksome irksome constraint constraint i i underwent, underwent, sitting sitting in in the the same same attitude attitude hours hours upon upon hours, hours, afraid afraid to to move move an an arm arm or or a a leg leg lest lest miss miss murdstone murdstone should should complain complain (as (as she she did did on on the the least least pretence) pretence) of of my my restlessness, restlessness, and and afraid afraid to to move move an an eye eye lest lest she she should should light light on on some some look look of of dislike dislike or or scrutiny scrutiny that that would would find find new new cause cause for for complaint complaint in in mine! mine! what what intolerable intolerable dulness dulness to to sit sit listening listening to to the the ticking ticking of of the the clock; clock; and and watching watching miss miss murdstone's murdstone's little little shiny shiny steel steel beads beads as as she she strung strung them; them; and and wondering wondering whether whether she she would would ever ever be be married, married, and and if if so, so, to to what what sort sort of of unhappy unhappy man; man; and and counting counting the the divisions divisions in in the the moulding moulding of of the the chimney-piece; chimney-piece; and and wandering wandering away, away, with with my my eyes, eyes, to to the the ceiling, ceiling, among among the the curls curls and and corkscrews corkscrews in in the the paper paper on on the the wall! wall! what what walks walks i i took took alone, alone, down down muddy muddy lanes, lanes, in in the the bad bad winter winter weather, weather, carrying carrying that that parlour, parlour, and and mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone in in it, it, everywhere: everywhere: a a monstrous monstrous load load that that i i was was obliged obliged to to bear, bear, a a daymare daymare that that there there was was no no possibility possibility of of breaking breaking in, in, a a weight weight that that brooded brooded on on my my wits, wits, and and blunted blunted them! them! what what meals meals i i had had in in silence silence and and embarrassment, embarrassment, always always feeling feeling that that there there were were a a knife knife and and fork fork too too many, many, and and that that mine; mine; an an appetite appetite too too many, many, and and that that mine; mine; a a plate plate and and chair chair too too many, many, and and those those mine; mine; a a somebody somebody too too many, many, and and that that i! i! what what evenings, evenings, when when the the candles candles came, came, and and i i was was expected expected to to employ employ myself, myself, but, but, not not daring daring to to read read an an entertaining entertaining book, book, pored pored over over some some hard-headed, hard-headed, harder-hearted harder-hearted treatise treatise on on arithmetic; arithmetic; when when the the tables tables of of weights weights and and measures measures set set themselves themselves to to tunes, tunes, as as 'rule 'rule britannia', britannia', or or 'away 'away with with melancholy'; melancholy'; when when they they wouldn't wouldn't stand stand still still to to be be learnt, learnt, but but would would go go threading threading my my grandmother's grandmother's needle needle through through my my unfortunate unfortunate head, head, in in at at one one ear ear and and out out at at the the other! other! what what yawns yawns and and dozes dozes i i lapsed lapsed into, into, in in spite spite of of all all my my care; care; what what starts starts i i came came out out of of concealed concealed sleeps sleeps with; with; what what answers answers i i never never got, got, to to little little observations observations that that i i rarely rarely made; made; what what a a blank blank space space i i seemed, seemed, which which everybody everybody overlooked, overlooked, and and yet yet was was in in everybody's everybody's way; way; what what a a heavy heavy relief relief it it was was to to hear hear miss miss murdstone murdstone hail hail the the first first stroke stroke of of nine nine at at night, night, and and order order me me to to bed! bed! thus thus the the holidays holidays lagged lagged away, away, until until the the morning morning came came when when miss miss murdstone murdstone said: said: 'here's 'here's the the last last day day off!' off!' and and gave gave me me the the closing closing cup cup of of tea tea of of the the vacation. vacation. i i was was not not sorry sorry to to go. go. i i had had lapsed lapsed into into a a stupid stupid state; state; but but i i was was recovering recovering a a little little and and looking looking forward forward to to steerforth, steerforth, albeit albeit mr. mr. creakle creakle loomed loomed behind behind him. him. again again mr. mr. barkis barkis appeared appeared at at the the gate, gate, and and again again miss miss murdstone murdstone in in her her warning warning voice, voice, said: said: 'clara!' 'clara!' when when my my mother mother bent bent over over me, me, to to bid bid me me farewell. farewell. i i kissed kissed her, her, and and my my baby baby brother, brother, and and was was very very sorry sorry then; then; but but not not sorry sorry to to go go away, away, for for the the gulf gulf between between us us was was there, there, and and the the parting parting was was there, there, every every day. day. and and it it is is not not so so much much the the embrace embrace she she gave gave me, me, that that lives lives in in my my mind, mind, though though it it was was as as fervent fervent as as could could be, be, as as what what followed followed the the embrace. embrace. i i was was in in the the carrier's carrier's cart cart when when i i heard heard her her calling calling to to me. me. i i looked looked out, out, and and she she stood stood at at the the garden-gate garden-gate alone, alone, holding holding her her baby baby up up in in her her arms arms for for me me to to see. see. it it was was cold cold still still weather; weather; and and not not a a hair hair of of her her head, head, nor nor a a fold fold of of her her dress, dress, was was stirred, stirred, as as she she looked looked intently intently at at me, me, holding holding up up her her child. child. so so i i lost lost her. her. so so i i saw saw her her afterwards, afterwards, in in my my sleep sleep at at school school -- -- a a silent silent presence presence near near my my bed bed -- -- looking looking at at me me with with the the same same intent intent face face -- -- holding holding up up her her baby baby in in her her arms. arms. chapter chapter 9. 9. i i have have a a memorable memorable birthday birthday i i pass pass over over all all that that happened happened at at school, school, until until the the anniversary anniversary of of my my birthday birthday came came round round in in march. march. except except that that steerforth steerforth was was more more to to be be admired admired than than ever, ever, i i remember remember nothing. nothing. he he was was going going away away at at the the end end of of the the half-year, half-year, if if not not sooner, sooner, and and was was more more spirited spirited and and independent independent than than before before in in my my eyes, eyes, and and therefore therefore more more engaging engaging than than before; before; but but beyond beyond this this i i remember remember nothing. nothing. the the great great remembrance remembrance by by which which that that time time is is marked marked in in my my mind, mind, seems seems to to have have swallowed swallowed up up all all lesser lesser recollections, recollections, and and to to exist exist alone. alone. it it is is even even difficult difficult for for me me to to believe believe that that there there was was a a gap gap of of full full two two months months between between my my return return to to salem salem house house and and the the arrival arrival of of that that birthday. birthday. i i can can only only understand understand that that the the fact fact was was so, so, because because i i know know it it must must have have been been so; so; otherwise otherwise i i should should feel feel convinced convinced that that there there was was no no interval, interval, and and that that the the one one occasion occasion trod trod upon upon the the other's other's heels. heels. how how well well i i recollect recollect the the kind kind of of day day it it was! was! i i smell smell the the fog fog that that hung hung about about the the place; place; i i see see the the hoar hoar frost, frost, ghostly, ghostly, through through it; it; i i feel feel my my rimy rimy hair hair fall fall clammy clammy on on my my cheek; cheek; i i look look along along the the dim dim perspective perspective of of the the schoolroom, schoolroom, with with a a sputtering sputtering candle candle here here and and there there to to light light up up the the foggy foggy morning, morning, and and the the breath breath of of the the boys boys wreathing wreathing and and smoking smoking in in the the raw raw cold cold as as they they blow blow upon upon their their fingers, fingers, and and tap tap their their feet feet upon upon the the floor. floor. it it was was after after breakfast, breakfast, and and we we had had been been summoned summoned in in from from the the playground, playground, when when mr. mr. sharp sharp entered entered and and said: said: 'david 'david copperfield copperfield is is to to go go into into the the parlour.' parlour.' i i expected expected a a hamper hamper from from peggotty, peggotty, and and brightened brightened at at the the order. order. some some of of the the boys boys about about me me put put in in their their claim claim not not to to be be forgotten forgotten in in the the distribution distribution of of the the good good things, things, as as i i got got out out of of my my seat seat with with great great alacrity. alacrity. 'don't 'don't hurry, hurry, david,' david,' said said mr. mr. sharp. sharp. 'there's 'there's time time enough, enough, my my boy, boy, don't don't hurry.' hurry.' i i might might have have been been surprised surprised by by the the feeling feeling tone tone in in which which he he spoke, spoke, if if i i had had given given it it a a thought; thought; but but i i gave gave it it none none until until afterwards. afterwards. i i hurried hurried away away to to the the parlour; parlour; and and there there i i found found mr. mr. creakle, creakle, sitting sitting at at his his breakfast breakfast with with the the cane cane and and a a newspaper newspaper before before him, him, and and mrs. mrs. creakle creakle with with an an opened opened letter letter in in her her hand. hand. but but no no hamper. hamper. 'david 'david copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. creakle, creakle, leading leading me me to to a a sofa, sofa, and and sitting sitting down down beside beside me. me. 'i 'i want want to to speak speak to to you very very particularly. particularly. i i have have something something to to tell tell you, my my child.' child.' mr. mr. creakle, creakle, at at whom whom of of course course i i looked, looked, shook shook his his head head without without looking looking at at me, me, and and stopped stopped up up a a sigh sigh with with a a very very large large piece piece of of buttered buttered toast. toast. 'you are are too too young young to to know know how how the the world world changes changes every every day,' day,' said said mrs. mrs. creakle, creakle, 'and 'and how how the the people people in in it it pass pass away. away. but but we we all all have have to to learn learn it, it, david; david; some some of of us us when when we we are are young, young, some some of of us us when when we we are are old, old, some some of of us us at at all all times times of of our our lives.' lives.' i i looked looked at at her her earnestly. earnestly. 'when 'when you came came away away from from home home at at the the end end of of the the vacation,' vacation,' said said mrs. mrs. creakle, creakle, after after a a pause, pause, 'were 'were they they all all well?' well?' after after another another pause, pause, 'was 'was your your mama mama well?' well?' i i trembled trembled without without distinctly distinctly knowing knowing why, why, and and still still looked looked at at her her earnestly, earnestly, making making no no attempt attempt to to answer. answer. 'because,' 'because,' said said she, she, 'i 'i grieve grieve to to tell tell you that that i i hear hear this this morning morning your your mama mama is is very very ill.' ill.' a a mist mist rose rose between between mrs. mrs. creakle creakle and and me, me, and and her her figure figure seemed seemed to to move move in in it it for for an an instant. instant. then then i i felt felt the the burning burning tears tears run run down down my my face, face, and and it it was was steady steady again. again. 'she 'she is is very very dangerously dangerously ill,' ill,' she she added. added. i i knew knew all all now. now. 'she 'she is is dead.' dead.' there there was was no no need need to to tell tell me me so. so. i i had had already already broken broken out out into into a a desolate desolate cry, cry, and and felt felt an an orphan orphan in in the the wide wide world. world. she she was was very very kind kind to to me. me. she she kept kept me me there there all all day, day, and and left left me me alone alone sometimes; sometimes; and and i i cried, cried, and and wore wore myself myself to to sleep, sleep, and and awoke awoke and and cried cried again. again. when when i i could could cry cry no no more, more, i i began began to to think; think; and and then then the the oppression oppression on on my my breast breast was was heaviest, heaviest, and and my my grief grief a a dull dull pain pain that that there there was was no no ease ease for. for. and and yet yet my my thoughts thoughts were were idle; idle; not not intent intent on on the the calamity calamity that that weighed weighed upon upon my my heart, heart, but but idly idly loitering loitering near near it. it. i i thought thought of of our our house house shut shut up up and and hushed. hushed. i i thought thought of of the the little little baby, baby, who, who, mrs. mrs. creakle creakle said, said, had had been been pining pining away away for for some some time, time, and and who, who, they they believed, believed, would would die die too. too. i i thought thought of of my my father's father's grave grave in in the the churchyard, churchyard, by by our our house, house, and and of of my my mother mother lying lying there there beneath beneath the the tree tree i i knew knew so so well. well. i i stood stood upon upon a a chair chair when when i i was was left left alone, alone, and and looked looked into into the the glass glass to to see see how how red red my my eyes eyes were, were, and and how how sorrowful sorrowful my my face. face. i i considered, considered, after after some some hours hours were were gone, gone, if if my my tears tears were were really really hard hard to to flow flow now, now, as as they they seemed seemed to to be, be, what, what, in in connexion connexion with with my my loss, loss, it it would would affect affect me me most most to to think think of of when when i i drew drew near near home home -- -- for for i i was was going going home home to to the the funeral. funeral. i i am am sensible sensible of of having having felt felt that that a a dignity dignity attached attached to to me me among among the the rest rest of of the the boys, boys, and and that that i i was was important important in in my my affliction. affliction. if if ever ever child child were were stricken stricken with with sincere sincere grief, grief, i i was. was. but but i i remember remember that that this this importance importance was was a a kind kind of of satisfaction satisfaction to to me, me, when when i i walked walked in in the the playground playground that that afternoon afternoon while while the the boys boys were were in in school. school. when when i i saw saw them them glancing glancing at at me me out out of of the the windows, windows, as as they they went went up up to to their their classes, classes, i i felt felt distinguished, distinguished, and and looked looked more more melancholy, melancholy, and and walked walked slower. slower. when when school school was was over, over, and and they they came came out out and and spoke spoke to to me, me, i i felt felt it it rather rather good good in in myself myself not not to to be be proud proud to to any any of of them, them, and and to to take take exactly exactly the the same same notice notice of of them them all, all, as as before. before. i i was was to to go go home home next next night; night; not not by by the the mail, mail, but but by by the the heavy heavy night-coach, night-coach, which which was was called called the the farmer, farmer, and and was was principally principally used used by by country-people country-people travelling travelling short short intermediate intermediate distances distances upon upon the the road. road. we we had had no no story-telling story-telling that that evening, evening, and and traddles traddles insisted insisted on on lending lending me me his his pillow. pillow. i i don't don't know know what what good good he he thought thought it it would would do do me, me, for for i i had had one one of of my my own: own: but but it it was was all all he he had had to to lend, lend, poor poor fellow, fellow, except except a a sheet sheet of of letter-paper letter-paper full full of of skeletons; skeletons; and and that that he he gave gave me me at at parting, parting, as as a a soother soother of of my my sorrows sorrows and and a a contribution contribution to to my my peace peace of of mind. mind. i i left left salem salem house house upon upon the the morrow morrow afternoon. afternoon. i i little little thought thought then then that that i i left left it, it, never never to to return. return. we we travelled travelled very very slowly slowly all all night, night, and and did did not not get get into into yarmouth yarmouth before before nine nine or or ten ten o'clock o'clock in in the the morning. morning. i i looked looked out out for for mr. mr. barkis, barkis, but but he he was was not not there; there; and and instead instead of of him him a a fat, fat, short-winded, short-winded, merry-looking, merry-looking, little little old old man man in in black, black, with with rusty rusty little little bunches bunches of of ribbons ribbons at at the the knees knees of of his his breeches, breeches, black black stockings, stockings, and and a a broad-brimmed broad-brimmed hat, hat, came came puffing puffing up up to to the the coach coach window, window, and and said: said: 'master 'master copperfield?' copperfield?' 'yes, 'yes, sir.' sir.' 'will 'will you come come with with me, me, young young sir, sir, if if you please,' please,' he he said, said, opening opening the the door, door, 'and 'and i i shall shall have have the the pleasure pleasure of of taking taking you home.' home.' i i put put my my hand hand in in his, his, wondering wondering who who he he was, was, and and we we walked walked away away to to a a shop shop in in a a narrow narrow street, street, on on which which was was written written omer, omer, draper, draper, tailor, tailor, haberdasher, haberdasher, funeral funeral furnisher, furnisher, &c. &c. it it was was a a close close and and stifling stifling little little shop; shop; full full of of all all sorts sorts of of clothing, clothing, made made and and unmade, unmade, including including one one window window full full of of beaver-hats beaver-hats and and bonnets. bonnets. we we went went into into a a little little back-parlour back-parlour behind behind the the shop, shop, where where we we found found three three young young women women at at work work on on a a quantity quantity of of black black materials, materials, which which were were heaped heaped upon upon the the table, table, and and little little bits bits and and cuttings cuttings of of which which were were littered littered all all over over the the floor. floor. there there was was a a good good fire fire in in the the room, room, and and a a breathless breathless smell smell of of warm warm black black crape crape -- -- i i did did not not know know what what the the smell smell was was then, then, but but i i know know now. now. the the three three young young women, women, who who appeared appeared to to be be very very industrious industrious and and comfortable, comfortable, raised raised their their heads heads to to look look at at me, me, and and then then went went on on with with their their work. work. stitch, stitch, stitch, stitch, stitch. stitch. at at the the same same time time there there came came from from a a workshop workshop across across a a little little yard yard outside outside the the window, window, a a regular regular sound sound of of hammering hammering that that kept kept a a kind kind of of tune: tune: rat rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, without without any any variation. variation. 'well,' 'well,' said said my my conductor conductor to to one one of of the the three three young young women. women. 'how 'how do do you get get on, on, minnie?' minnie?' 'we 'we shall shall be be ready ready by by the the trying-on trying-on time,' time,' she she replied replied gaily, gaily, without without looking looking up. up. 'don't 'don't you be be afraid, afraid, father.' father.' mr. mr. omer omer took took off off his his broad-brimmed broad-brimmed hat, hat, and and sat sat down down and and panted. panted. he he was was so so fat fat that that he he was was obliged obliged to to pant pant some some time time before before he he could could say: say: 'that's 'that's right.' right.' 'father!' 'father!' said said minnie, minnie, playfully. playfully. 'what 'what a a porpoise porpoise you do do grow!' grow!' 'well, 'well, i i don't don't know know how how it it is, is, my my dear,' dear,' he he replied, replied, considering considering about about it. it. 'i 'i am am rather rather so.' so.' 'you are are such such a a comfortable comfortable man, man, you see,' see,' said said minnie. minnie. 'you take take things things so so easy.' easy.' 'no 'no use use taking taking 'em 'em otherwise, otherwise, my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'no, 'no, indeed,' indeed,' returned returned his his daughter. daughter. 'we 'we are are all all pretty pretty gay gay here, here, thank thank heaven! heaven! ain't ain't we, we, father?' father?' 'i 'i hope hope so, so, my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'as 'as i i have have got got my my breath breath now, now, i i think think i'll i'll measure measure this this young young scholar. scholar. would would you walk walk into into the the shop, shop, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' i i preceded preceded mr. mr. omer, omer, in in compliance compliance with with his his request; request; and and after after showing showing me me a a roll roll of of cloth cloth which which he he said said was was extra extra super, super, and and too too good good mourning mourning for for anything anything short short of of parents, parents, he he took took my my various various dimensions, dimensions, and and put put them them down down in in a a book. book. while while he he was was recording recording them them he he called called my my attention attention to to his his stock stock in in trade, trade, and and to to certain certain fashions fashions which which he he said said had had 'just 'just come come up', up', and and to to certain certain other other fashions fashions which which he he said said had had 'just 'just gone gone out'. out'. 'and 'and by by that that sort sort of of thing thing we we very very often often lose lose a a little little mint mint of of money,' money,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'but 'but fashions fashions are are like like human human beings. beings. they they come come in, in, nobody nobody knows knows when, when, why, why, or or how; how; and and they they go go out, out, nobody nobody knows knows when, when, why, why, or or how. how. everything everything is is like like life, life, in in my my opinion, opinion, if if you look look at at it it in in that that point point of of view.' view.' i i was was too too sorrowful sorrowful to to discuss discuss the the question, question, which which would would possibly possibly have have been been beyond beyond me me under under any any circumstances; circumstances; and and mr. mr. omer omer took took me me back back into into the the parlour, parlour, breathing breathing with with some some difficulty difficulty on on the the way. way. he he then then called called down down a a little little break-neck break-neck range range of of steps steps behind behind a a door: door: 'bring 'bring up up that that tea tea and and bread-and-butter!' bread-and-butter!' which, which, after after some some time, time, during during which which i i sat sat looking looking about about me me and and thinking, thinking, and and listening listening to to the the stitching stitching in in the the room room and and the the tune tune that that was was being being hammered hammered across across the the yard, yard, appeared appeared on on a a tray, tray, and and turned turned out out to to be be for for me. me. 'i 'i have have been been acquainted acquainted with with you,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, after after watching watching me me for for some some minutes, minutes, during during which which i i had had not not made made much much impression impression on on the the breakfast, breakfast, for for the the black black things things destroyed destroyed my my appetite, appetite, 'i 'i have have been been acquainted acquainted with with you a a long long time, time, my my young young friend.' friend.' 'have 'have you, sir?' sir?' 'all 'all your your life,' life,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'i 'i may may say say before before it. it. i i knew knew your your father father before before you. he he was was five five foot foot nine nine and and a a half, half, and and he he lays lays in in five-and-twen-ty five-and-twen-ty foot foot of of ground.' ground.' 'rat 'rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat,' tat-tat,' across across the the yard. yard. 'he 'he lays lays in in five five and and twen-ty twen-ty foot foot of of ground, ground, if if he he lays lays in in a a fraction,' fraction,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, pleasantly. pleasantly. 'it 'it was was either either his his request request or or her her direction, direction, i i forget forget which.' which.' 'do 'do you know know how how my my little little brother brother is, is, sir?' sir?' i i inquired. inquired. mr. mr. omer omer shook shook his his head. head. 'rat 'rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat, tat-tat, rat rat -- -- tat-tat.' tat-tat.' 'he 'he is is in in his his mother's mother's arms,' arms,' said said he. he. 'oh, 'oh, poor poor little little fellow! fellow! is is he he dead?' dead?' 'don't 'don't mind mind it it more more than than you can can help,' help,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'yes. 'yes. the the baby's baby's dead.' dead.' my my wounds wounds broke broke out out afresh afresh at at this this intelligence. intelligence. i i left left the the scarcely-tasted scarcely-tasted breakfast, breakfast, and and went went and and rested rested my my head head on on another another table, table, in in a a corner corner of of the the little little room, room, which which minnie minnie hastily hastily cleared, cleared, lest lest i i should should spot spot the the mourning mourning that that was was lying lying there there with with my my tears. tears. she she was was a a pretty, pretty, good-natured good-natured girl, girl, and and put put my my hair hair away away from from my my eyes eyes with with a a soft, soft, kind kind touch; touch; but but she she was was very very cheerful cheerful at at having having nearly nearly finished finished her her work work and and being being in in good good time, time, and and was was so so different different from from me! me! presently presently the the tune tune left left off, off, and and a a good-looking good-looking young young fellow fellow came came across across the the yard yard into into the the room. room. he he had had a a hammer hammer in in his his hand, hand, and and his his mouth mouth was was full full of of little little nails, nails, which which he he was was obliged obliged to to take take out out before before he he could could speak. speak. 'well, 'well, joram!' joram!' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'how 'how do do you get get on?' on?' 'all 'all right,' right,' said said joram. joram. 'done, 'done, sir.' sir.' minnie minnie coloured coloured a a little, little, and and the the other other two two girls girls smiled smiled at at one one another. another. 'what! 'what! you were were at at it it by by candle-light candle-light last last night, night, when when i i was was at at the the club, club, then? then? were were you?' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, shutting shutting up up one one eye. eye. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said joram. joram. 'as 'as you said said we we could could make make a a little little trip trip of of it, it, and and go go over over together, together, if if it it was was done, done, minnie minnie and and me me -- -- and and you.' 'oh! 'oh! i i thought thought you were were going going to to leave leave me me out out altogether,' altogether,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, laughing laughing till till he he coughed. coughed. ' ' -- -- as as you was was so so good good as as to to say say that,' that,' resumed resumed the the young young man, man, 'why 'why i i turned turned to to with with a a will, will, you see. see. will will you give give me me your your opinion opinion of of it?' it?' 'i 'i will,' will,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, rising. rising. 'my 'my dear'; dear'; and and he he stopped stopped and and turned turned to to me: me: 'would 'would you like like to to see see your your -- -- ' ' 'no, 'no, father,' father,' minnie minnie interposed. interposed. 'i 'i thought thought it it might might be be agreeable, agreeable, my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'but 'but perhaps perhaps you're you're right.' right.' i i can't can't say say how how i i knew knew it it was was my my dear, dear, dear dear mother's mother's coffin coffin that that they they went went to to look look at. at. i i had had never never heard heard one one making; making; i i had had never never seen seen one one that that i i know know of. of. -- -- but but it it came came into into my my mind mind what what the the noise noise was, was, while while it it was was going going on; on; and and when when the the young young man man entered, entered, i i am am sure sure i i knew knew what what he he had had been been doing. doing. the the work work being being now now finished, finished, the the two two girls, girls, whose whose names names i i had had not not heard, heard, brushed brushed the the shreds shreds and and threads threads from from their their dresses, dresses, and and went went into into the the shop shop to to put put that that to to rights, rights, and and wait wait for for customers. customers. minnie minnie stayed stayed behind behind to to fold fold up up what what they they had had made, made, and and pack pack it it in in two two baskets. baskets. this this she she did did upon upon her her knees, knees, humming humming a a lively lively little little tune tune the the while. while. joram, joram, who who i i had had no no doubt doubt was was her her lover, lover, came came in in and and stole stole a a kiss kiss from from her her while while she she was was busy busy (he (he didn't didn't appear appear to to mind mind me, me, at at all), all), and and said said her her father father was was gone gone for for the the chaise, chaise, and and he he must must make make haste haste and and get get himself himself ready. ready. then then he he went went out out again; again; and and then then she she put put her her thimble thimble and and scissors scissors in in her her pocket, pocket, and and stuck stuck a a needle needle threaded threaded with with black black thread thread neatly neatly in in the the bosom bosom of of her her gown, gown, and and put put on on her her outer outer clothing clothing smartly, smartly, at at a a little little glass glass behind behind the the door, door, in in which which i i saw saw the the reflection reflection of of her her pleased pleased face. face. all all this this i i observed, observed, sitting sitting at at the the table table in in the the corner corner with with my my head head leaning leaning on on my my hand, hand, and and my my thoughts thoughts running running on on very very different different things. things. the the chaise chaise soon soon came came round round to to the the front front of of the the shop, shop, and and the the baskets baskets being being put put in in first, first, i i was was put put in in next, next, and and those those three three followed. followed. i i remember remember it it as as a a kind kind of of half half chaise-cart, chaise-cart, half half pianoforte-van, pianoforte-van, painted painted of of a a sombre sombre colour, colour, and and drawn drawn by by a a black black horse horse with with a a long long tail. tail. there there was was plenty plenty of of room room for for us us all. all. i i do do not not think think i i have have ever ever experienced experienced so so strange strange a a feeling feeling in in my my life life (i (i am am wiser wiser now, now, perhaps) perhaps) as as that that of of being being with with them, them, remembering remembering how how they they had had been been employed, employed, and and seeing seeing them them enjoy enjoy the the ride. ride. i i was was not not angry angry with with them; them; i i was was more more afraid afraid of of them, them, as as if if i i were were cast cast away away among among creatures creatures with with whom whom i i had had no no community community of of nature. nature. they they were were very very cheerful. cheerful. the the old old man man sat sat in in front front to to drive, drive, and and the the two two young young people people sat sat behind behind him, him, and and whenever whenever he he spoke spoke to to them them leaned leaned forward, forward, the the one one on on one one side side of of his his chubby chubby face face and and the the other other on on the the other, other, and and made made a a great great deal deal of of him. him. they they would would have have talked talked to to me me too, too, but but i i held held back, back, and and moped moped in in my my corner; corner; scared scared by by their their love-making love-making and and hilarity, hilarity, though though it it was was far far from from boisterous, boisterous, and and almost almost wondering wondering that that no no judgement judgement came came upon upon them them for for their their hardness hardness of of heart. heart. so, so, when when they they stopped stopped to to bait bait the the horse, horse, and and ate ate and and drank drank and and enjoyed enjoyed themselves, themselves, i i could could touch touch nothing nothing that that they they touched, touched, but but kept kept my my fast fast unbroken. unbroken. so, so, when when we we reached reached home, home, i i dropped dropped out out of of the the chaise chaise behind, behind, as as quickly quickly as as possible, possible, that that i i might might not not be be in in their their company company before before those those solemn solemn windows, windows, looking looking blindly blindly on on me me like like closed closed eyes eyes once once bright. bright. and and oh, oh, how how little little need need i i had had had had to to think think what what would would move move me me to to tears tears when when i i came came back back -- -- seeing seeing the the window window of of my my mother's mother's room, room, and and next next it it that that which, which, in in the the better better time, time, was was mine! mine! i i was was in in peggotty's peggotty's arms arms before before i i got got to to the the door, door, and and she she took took me me into into the the house. house. her her grief grief burst burst out out when when she she first first saw saw me; me; but but she she controlled controlled it it soon, soon, and and spoke spoke in in whispers, whispers, and and walked walked softly, softly, as as if if the the dead dead could could be be disturbed. disturbed. she she had had not not been been in in bed, bed, i i found, found, for for a a long long time. time. she she sat sat up up at at night night still, still, and and watched. watched. as as long long as as her her poor poor dear dear pretty pretty was was above above the the ground, ground, she she said, said, she she would would never never desert desert her. her. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone took took no no heed heed of of me me when when i i went went into into the the parlour parlour where where he he was, was, but but sat sat by by the the fireside, fireside, weeping weeping silently, silently, and and pondering pondering in in his his elbow-chair. elbow-chair. miss miss murdstone, murdstone, who who was was busy busy at at her her writing-desk, writing-desk, which which was was covered covered with with letters letters and and papers, papers, gave gave me me her her cold cold finger-nails, finger-nails, and and asked asked me, me, in in an an iron iron whisper, whisper, if if i i had had been been measured measured for for my my mourning. mourning. i i said: said: 'yes.' 'yes.' 'and 'and your your shirts,' shirts,' said said miss miss murdstone; murdstone; 'have 'have you brought brought 'em 'em home?' home?' 'yes, 'yes, ma'am. ma'am. i i have have brought brought home home all all my my clothes.' clothes.' this this was was all all the the consolation consolation that that her her firmness firmness administered administered to to me. me. i i do do not not doubt doubt that that she she had had a a choice choice pleasure pleasure in in exhibiting exhibiting what what she she called called her her self-command, self-command, and and her her firmness, firmness, and and her her strength strength of of mind, mind, and and her her common common sense, sense, and and the the whole whole diabolical diabolical catalogue catalogue of of her her unamiable unamiable qualities, qualities, on on such such an an occasion. occasion. she she was was particularly particularly proud proud of of her her turn turn for for business; business; and and she she showed showed it it now now in in reducing reducing everything everything to to pen pen and and ink, ink, and and being being moved moved by by nothing. nothing. all all the the rest rest of of that that day, day, and and from from morning morning to to night night afterwards, afterwards, she she sat sat at at that that desk, desk, scratching scratching composedly composedly with with a a hard hard pen, pen, speaking speaking in in the the same same imperturbable imperturbable whisper whisper to to everybody; everybody; never never relaxing relaxing a a muscle muscle of of her her face, face, or or softening softening a a tone tone of of her her voice, voice, or or appearing appearing with with an an atom atom of of her her dress dress astray. astray. her her brother brother took took a a book book sometimes, sometimes, but but never never read read it it that that i i saw. saw. he he would would open open it it and and look look at at it it as as if if he he were were reading, reading, but but would would remain remain for for a a whole whole hour hour without without turning turning the the leaf, leaf, and and then then put put it it down down and and walk walk to to and and fro fro in in the the room. room. i i used used to to sit sit with with folded folded hands hands watching watching him, him, and and counting counting his his footsteps, footsteps, hour hour after after hour. hour. he he very very seldom seldom spoke spoke to to her, her, and and never never to to me. me. he he seemed seemed to to be be the the only only restless restless thing, thing, except except the the clocks, clocks, in in the the whole whole motionless motionless house. house. in in these these days days before before the the funeral, funeral, i i saw saw but but little little of of peggotty, peggotty, except except that, that, in in passing passing up up or or down down stairs, stairs, i i always always found found her her close close to to the the room room where where my my mother mother and and her her baby baby lay, lay, and and except except that that she she came came to to me me every every night, night, and and sat sat by by my my bed's bed's head head while while i i went went to to sleep. sleep. a a day day or or two two before before the the burial burial -- -- i i think think it it was was a a day day or or two two before, before, but but i i am am conscious conscious of of confusion confusion in in my my mind mind about about that that heavy heavy time, time, with with nothing nothing to to mark mark its its progress progress -- -- she she took took me me into into the the room. room. i i only only recollect recollect that that underneath underneath some some white white covering covering on on the the bed, bed, with with a a beautiful beautiful cleanliness cleanliness and and freshness freshness all all around around it, it, there there seemed seemed to to me me to to lie lie embodied embodied the the solemn solemn stillness stillness that that was was in in the the house; house; and and that that when when she she would would have have turned turned the the cover cover gently gently back, back, i i cried: cried: 'oh 'oh no! no! oh oh no!' no!' and and held held her her hand. hand. if if the the funeral funeral had had been been yesterday, yesterday, i i could could not not recollect recollect it it better. better. the the very very air air of of the the best best parlour, parlour, when when i i went went in in at at the the door, door, the the bright bright condition condition of of the the fire, fire, the the shining shining of of the the wine wine in in the the decanters, decanters, the the patterns patterns of of the the glasses glasses and and plates, plates, the the faint faint sweet sweet smell smell of of cake, cake, the the odour odour of of miss miss murdstone's murdstone's dress, dress, and and our our black black clothes. clothes. mr. mr. chillip chillip is is in in the the room, room, and and comes comes to to speak speak to to me. me. 'and 'and how how is is master master david?' david?' he he says, says, kindly. kindly. i i cannot cannot tell tell him him very very well. well. i i give give him him my my hand, hand, which which he he holds holds in in his. his. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' says says mr. mr. chillip, chillip, meekly meekly smiling, smiling, with with something something shining shining in in his his eye. eye. 'our 'our little little friends friends grow grow up up around around us. us. they they grow grow out out of of our our knowledge, knowledge, ma'am?' ma'am?' this this is is to to miss miss murdstone, murdstone, who who makes makes no no reply. reply. 'there 'there is is a a great great improvement improvement here, here, ma'am?' ma'am?' says says mr. mr. chillip. chillip. miss miss murdstone murdstone merely merely answers answers with with a a frown frown and and a a formal formal bend: bend: mr. mr. chillip, chillip, discomfited, discomfited, goes goes into into a a corner, corner, keeping keeping me me with with him, him, and and opens opens his his mouth mouth no no more. more. i i remark remark this, this, because because i i remark remark everything everything that that happens, happens, not not because because i i care care about about myself, myself, or or have have done done since since i i came came home. home. and and now now the the bell bell begins begins to to sound, sound, and and mr. mr. omer omer and and another another come come to to make make us us ready. ready. as as peggotty peggotty was was wont wont to to tell tell me, me, long long ago, ago, the the followers followers of of my my father father to to the the same same grave grave were were made made ready ready in in the the same same room. room. there there are are mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, our our neighbour neighbour mr. mr. grayper, grayper, mr. mr. chillip, chillip, and and i. i. when when we we go go out out to to the the door, door, the the bearers bearers and and their their load load are are in in the the garden; garden; and and they they move move before before us us down down the the path, path, and and past past the the elms, elms, and and through through the the gate, gate, and and into into the the churchyard, churchyard, where where i i have have so so often often heard heard the the birds birds sing sing on on a a summer summer morning. morning. we we stand stand around around the the grave. grave. the the day day seems seems different different to to me me from from every every other other day, day, and and the the light light not not of of the the same same colour colour -- -- of of a a sadder sadder colour. colour. now now there there is is a a solemn solemn hush, hush, which which we we have have brought brought from from home home with with what what is is resting resting in in the the mould; mould; and and while while we we stand stand bareheaded, bareheaded, i i hear hear the the voice voice of of the the clergyman, clergyman, sounding sounding remote remote in in the the open open air, air, and and yet yet distinct distinct and and plain, plain, saying: saying: 'i 'i am am the the resurrection resurrection and and the the life, life, saith saith the the lord!' lord!' then then i i hear hear sobs; sobs; and, and, standing standing apart apart among among the the lookers-on, lookers-on, i i see see that that good good and and faithful faithful servant, servant, whom whom of of all all the the people people upon upon earth earth i i love love the the best, best, and and unto unto whom whom my my childish childish heart heart is is certain certain that that the the lord lord will will one one day day say: say: 'well 'well done.' done.' there there are are many many faces faces that that i i know, know, among among the the little little crowd; crowd; faces faces that that i i knew knew in in church, church, when when mine mine was was always always wondering wondering there; there; faces faces that that first first saw saw my my mother, mother, when when she she came came to to the the village village in in her her youthful youthful bloom. bloom. i i do do not not mind mind them them -- -- i i mind mind nothing nothing but but my my grief grief -- -- and and yet yet i i see see and and know know them them all; all; and and even even in in the the background, background, far far away, away, see see minnie minnie looking looking on, on, and and her her eye eye glancing glancing on on her her sweetheart, sweetheart, who who is is near near me. me. it it is is over, over, and and the the earth earth is is filled filled in, in, and and we we turn turn to to come come away. away. before before us us stands stands our our house, house, so so pretty pretty and and unchanged, unchanged, so so linked linked in in my my mind mind with with the the young young idea idea of of what what is is gone, gone, that that all all my my sorrow sorrow has has been been nothing nothing to to the the sorrow sorrow it it calls calls forth. forth. but but they they take take me me on; on; and and mr. mr. chillip chillip talks talks to to me; me; and and when when we we get get home, home, puts puts some some water water to to my my lips; lips; and and when when i i ask ask his his leave leave to to go go up up to to my my room, room, dismisses dismisses me me with with the the gentleness gentleness of of a a woman. woman. all all this, this, i i say, say, is is yesterday's yesterday's event. event. events events of of later later date date have have floated floated from from me me to to the the shore shore where where all all forgotten forgotten things things will will reappear, reappear, but but this this stands stands like like a a high high rock rock in in the the ocean. ocean. i i knew knew that that peggotty peggotty would would come come to to me me in in my my room. room. the the sabbath sabbath stillness stillness of of the the time time (the (the day day was was so so like like sunday! sunday! i i have have forgotten forgotten that) that) was was suited suited to to us us both. both. she she sat sat down down by by my my side side upon upon my my little little bed; bed; and and holding holding my my hand, hand, and and sometimes sometimes putting putting it it to to her her lips, lips, and and sometimes sometimes smoothing smoothing it it with with hers, hers, as as she she might might have have comforted comforted my my little little brother, brother, told told me, me, in in her her way, way, all all that that she she had had to to tell tell concerning concerning what what had had happened. happened. 'she 'she was was never never well,' well,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'for 'for a a long long time. time. she she was was uncertain uncertain in in her her mind, mind, and and not not happy. happy. when when her her baby baby was was born, born, i i thought thought at at first first she she would would get get better, better, but but she she was was more more delicate, delicate, and and sunk sunk a a little little every every day. day. she she used used to to like like to to sit sit alone alone before before her her baby baby came, came, and and then then she she cried; cried; but but afterwards afterwards she she used used to to sing sing to to it it -- -- so so soft, soft, that that i i once once thought, thought, when when i i heard heard her, her, it it was was like like a a voice voice up up in in the the air, air, that that was was rising rising away. away. 'i 'i think think she she got got to to be be more more timid, timid, and and more more frightened-like, frightened-like, of of late; late; and and that that a a hard hard word word was was like like a a blow blow to to her. her. but but she she was was always always the the same same to to me. me. she she never never changed changed to to her her foolish foolish peggotty, peggotty, didn't didn't my my sweet sweet girl.' girl.' here here peggotty peggotty stopped, stopped, and and softly softly beat beat upon upon my my hand hand a a little little while. while. 'the 'the last last time time that that i i saw saw her her like like her her own own old old self, self, was was the the night night when when you came came home, home, my my dear. dear. the the day day you went went away, away, she she said said to to me, me, "i "i never never shall shall see see my my pretty pretty darling darling again. again. something something tells tells me me so, so, that that tells tells the the truth, truth, i i know." know." 'she 'she tried tried to to hold hold up up after after that; that; and and many many a a time, time, when when they they told told her her she she was was thoughtless thoughtless and and light-hearted, light-hearted, made made believe believe to to be be so; so; but but it it was was all all a a bygone bygone then. then. she she never never told told her her husband husband what what she she had had told told me me -- -- she she was was afraid afraid of of saying saying it it to to anybody anybody else else -- -- till till one one night, night, a a little little more more than than a a week week before before it it happened, happened, when when she she said said to to him: him: "my "my dear, dear, i i think think i i am am dying." dying." '"it's '"it's off off my my mind mind now, now, peggotty," peggotty," she she told told me, me, when when i i laid laid her her in in her her bed bed that that night. night. "he "he will will believe believe it it more more and and more, more, poor poor fellow, fellow, every every day day for for a a few few days days to to come; come; and and then then it it will will be be past. past. i i am am very very tired. tired. if if this this is is sleep, sleep, sit sit by by me me while while i i sleep: sleep: don't don't leave leave me. me. god god bless bless both both my my children! children! god god protect protect and and keep keep my my fatherless fatherless boy!" boy!" 'i 'i never never left left her her afterwards,' afterwards,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'she 'she often often talked talked to to them them two two downstairs downstairs -- -- for for she she loved loved them; them; she she couldn't couldn't bear bear not not to to love love anyone anyone who who was was about about her her -- -- but but when when they they went went away away from from her her bed-side, bed-side, she she always always turned turned to to me, me, as as if if there there was was rest rest where where peggotty peggotty was, was, and and never never fell fell asleep asleep in in any any other other way. way. 'on 'on the the last last night, night, in in the the evening, evening, she she kissed kissed me, me, and and said: said: "if "if my my baby baby should should die die too, too, peggotty, peggotty, please please let let them them lay lay him him in in my my arms, arms, and and bury bury us us together." together." (it (it was was done; done; for for the the poor poor lamb lamb lived lived but but a a day day beyond beyond her.) her.) "let "let my my dearest dearest boy boy go go with with us us to to our our resting-place," resting-place," she she said, said, "and "and tell tell him him that that his his mother, mother, when when she she lay lay here, here, blessed blessed him him not not once, once, but but a a thousand thousand times."' times."' another another silence silence followed followed this, this, and and another another gentle gentle beating beating on on my my hand. hand. 'it 'it was was pretty pretty far far in in the the night,' night,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'when 'when she she asked asked me me for for some some drink; drink; and and when when she she had had taken taken it, it, gave gave me me such such a a patient patient smile, smile, the the dear! dear! -- -- so so beautiful! beautiful! 'daybreak 'daybreak had had come, come, and and the the sun sun was was rising, rising, when when she she said said to to me, me, how how kind kind and and considerate considerate mr. mr. copperfield copperfield had had always always been been to to her, her, and and how how he he had had borne borne with with her, her, and and told told her, her, when when she she doubted doubted herself, herself, that that a a loving loving heart heart was was better better and and stronger stronger than than wisdom, wisdom, and and that that he he was was a a happy happy man man in in hers. hers. "peggotty, "peggotty, my my dear," dear," she she said said then, then, "put "put me me nearer nearer to to you," for for she she was was very very weak. weak. "lay "lay your your good good arm arm underneath underneath my my neck," neck," she she said, said, "and "and turn turn me me to to you, for for your your face face is is going going far far off, off, and and i i want want it it to to be be near." near." i i put put it it as as she she asked; asked; and and oh oh davy! davy! the the time time had had come come when when my my first first parting parting words words to to you were were true true -- -- when when she she was was glad glad to to lay lay her her poor poor head head on on her her stupid stupid cross cross old old peggotty's peggotty's arm arm -- -- and and she she died died like like a a child child that that had had gone gone to to sleep!' sleep!' thus thus ended ended peggotty's peggotty's narration. narration. from from the the moment moment of of my my knowing knowing of of the the death death of of my my mother, mother, the the idea idea of of her her as as she she had had been been of of late late had had vanished vanished from from me. me. i i remembered remembered her, her, from from that that instant, instant, only only as as the the young young mother mother of of my my earliest earliest impressions, impressions, who who had had been been used used to to wind wind her her bright bright curls curls round round and and round round her her finger, finger, and and to to dance dance with with me me at at twilight twilight in in the the parlour. parlour. what what peggotty peggotty had had told told me me now, now, was was so so far far from from bringing bringing me me back back to to the the later later period, period, that that it it rooted rooted the the earlier earlier image image in in my my mind. mind. it it may may be be curious, curious, but but it it is is true. true. in in her her death death she she winged winged her her way way back back to to her her calm calm untroubled untroubled youth, youth, and and cancelled cancelled all all the the rest. rest. the the mother mother who who lay lay in in the the grave, grave, was was the the mother mother of of my my infancy; infancy; the the little little creature creature in in her her arms, arms, was was myself, myself, as as i i had had once once been, been, hushed hushed for for ever ever on on her her bosom. bosom. chapter chapter 10. 10. i i become become neglected, neglected, and and am am provided provided for for the the first first act act of of business business miss miss murdstone murdstone performed performed when when the the day day of of the the solemnity solemnity was was over, over, and and light light was was freely freely admitted admitted into into the the house, house, was was to to give give peggotty peggotty a a month's month's warning. warning. much much as as peggotty peggotty would would have have disliked disliked such such a a service, service, i i believe believe she she would would have have retained retained it, it, for for my my sake, sake, in in preference preference to to the the best best upon upon earth. earth. she she told told me me we we must must part, part, and and told told me me why; why; and and we we condoled condoled with with one one another, another, in in all all sincerity. sincerity. as as to to me me or or my my future, future, not not a a word word was was said, said, or or a a step step taken. taken. happy happy they they would would have have been, been, i i dare dare say, say, if if they they could could have have dismissed dismissed me me at at a a month's month's warning warning too. too. i i mustered mustered courage courage once, once, to to ask ask miss miss murdstone murdstone when when i i was was going going back back to to school; school; and and she she answered answered dryly, dryly, she she believed believed i i was was not not going going back back at at all. all. i i was was told told nothing nothing more. more. i i was was very very anxious anxious to to know know what what was was going going to to be be done done with with me, me, and and so so was was peggotty; peggotty; but but neither neither she she nor nor i i could could pick pick up up any any information information on on the the subject. subject. there there was was one one change change in in my my condition, condition, which, which, while while it it relieved relieved me me of of a a great great deal deal of of present present uneasiness, uneasiness, might might have have made made me, me, if if i i had had been been capable capable of of considering considering it it closely, closely, yet yet more more uncomfortable uncomfortable about about the the future. future. it it was was this. this. the the constraint constraint that that had had been been put put upon upon me, me, was was quite quite abandoned. abandoned. i i was was so so far far from from being being required required to to keep keep my my dull dull post post in in the the parlour, parlour, that that on on several several occasions, occasions, when when i i took took my my seat seat there, there, miss miss murdstone murdstone frowned frowned to to me me to to go go away. away. i i was was so so far far from from being being warned warned off off from from peggotty's peggotty's society, society, that, that, provided provided i i was was not not in in mr. mr. murdstone's, murdstone's, i i was was never never sought sought out out or or inquired inquired for. for. at at first first i i was was in in daily daily dread dread of of his his taking taking my my education education in in hand hand again, again, or or of of miss miss murdstone's murdstone's devoting devoting herself herself to to it; it; but but i i soon soon began began to to think think that that such such fears fears were were groundless, groundless, and and that that all all i i had had to to anticipate anticipate was was neglect. neglect. i i do do not not conceive conceive that that this this discovery discovery gave gave me me much much pain pain then. then. i i was was still still giddy giddy with with the the shock shock of of my my mother's mother's death, death, and and in in a a kind kind of of stunned stunned state state as as to to all all tributary tributary things. things. i i can can recollect, recollect, indeed, indeed, to to have have speculated, speculated, at at odd odd times, times, on on the the possibility possibility of of my my not not being being taught taught any any more, more, or or cared cared for for any any more; more; and and growing growing up up to to be be a a shabby, shabby, moody moody man, man, lounging lounging an an idle idle life life away, away, about about the the village; village; as as well well as as on on the the feasibility feasibility of of my my getting getting rid rid of of this this picture picture by by going going away away somewhere, somewhere, like like the the hero hero in in a a story, story, to to seek seek my my fortune: fortune: but but these these were were transient transient visions, visions, daydreams daydreams i i sat sat looking looking at at sometimes, sometimes, as as if if they they were were faintly faintly painted painted or or written written on on the the wall wall of of my my room, room, and and which, which, as as they they melted melted away, away, left left the the wall wall blank blank again. again. 'peggotty,' 'peggotty,' i i said said in in a a thoughtful thoughtful whisper, whisper, one one evening, evening, when when i i was was warming warming my my hands hands at at the the kitchen kitchen fire, fire, 'mr. 'mr. murdstone murdstone likes likes me me less less than than he he used used to. to. he he never never liked liked me me much, much, peggotty; peggotty; but but he he would would rather rather not not even even see see me me now, now, if if he he can can help help it.' it.' 'perhaps 'perhaps it's it's his his sorrow,' sorrow,' said said peggotty, peggotty, stroking stroking my my hair. hair. 'i 'i am am sure, sure, peggotty, peggotty, i i am am sorry sorry too. too. if if i i believed believed it it was was his his sorrow, sorrow, i i should should not not think think of of it it at at all. all. but but it's it's not not that; that; oh, oh, no, no, it's it's not not that.' that.' 'how 'how do do you know know it's it's not not that?' that?' said said peggotty, peggotty, after after a a silence. silence. 'oh, 'oh, his his sorrow sorrow is is another another and and quite quite a a different different thing. thing. he he is is sorry sorry at at this this moment, moment, sitting sitting by by the the fireside fireside with with miss miss murdstone; murdstone; but but if if i i was was to to go go in, in, peggotty, peggotty, he he would would be be something something besides.' besides.' 'what 'what would would he he be?' be?' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'angry,' 'angry,' i i answered, answered, with with an an involuntary involuntary imitation imitation of of his his dark dark frown. frown. 'if 'if he he was was only only sorry, sorry, he he wouldn't wouldn't look look at at me me as as he he does. does. i i am am only only sorry, sorry, and and it it makes makes me me feel feel kinder.' kinder.' peggotty peggotty said said nothing nothing for for a a little little while; while; and and i i warmed warmed my my hands, hands, as as silent silent as as she. she. 'davy,' 'davy,' she she said said at at length. length. 'yes, 'yes, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'i 'i have have tried, tried, my my dear, dear, all all ways ways i i could could think think of of -- -- all all the the ways ways there there are, are, and and all all the the ways ways there there ain't, ain't, in in short short -- -- to to get get a a suitable suitable service service here, here, in in blunderstone; blunderstone; but but there's there's no no such such a a thing, thing, my my love.' love.' 'and 'and what what do do you mean mean to to do, do, peggotty,' peggotty,' says says i, i, wistfully. wistfully. 'do 'do you mean mean to to go go and and seek seek your your fortune?' fortune?' 'i 'i expect expect i i shall shall be be forced forced to to go go to to yarmouth,' yarmouth,' replied replied peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and live live there.' there.' 'you might might have have gone gone farther farther off,' off,' i i said, said, brightening brightening a a little, little, 'and 'and been been as as bad bad as as lost. lost. i i shall shall see see you sometimes, sometimes, my my dear dear old old peggotty, peggotty, there. there. you won't won't be be quite quite at at the the other other end end of of the the world, world, will will you?' 'contrary 'contrary ways, ways, please please god!' god!' cried cried peggotty, peggotty, with with great great animation. animation. 'as 'as long long as as you are are here, here, my my pet, pet, i i shall shall come come over over every every week week of of my my life life to to see see you. one one day, day, every every week week of of my my life!' life!' i i felt felt a a great great weight weight taken taken off off my my mind mind by by this this promise: promise: but but even even this this was was not not all, all, for for peggotty peggotty went went on on to to say: say: 'i'm 'i'm a-going, a-going, davy, davy, you see, see, to to my my brother's, brother's, first, first, for for another another fortnight's fortnight's visit visit -- -- just just till till i i have have had had time time to to look look about about me, me, and and get get to to be be something something like like myself myself again. again. now, now, i i have have been been thinking thinking that that perhaps, perhaps, as as they they don't don't want want you here here at at present, present, you might might be be let let to to go go along along with with me.' me.' if if anything, anything, short short of of being being in in a a different different relation relation to to every every one one about about me, me, peggotty peggotty excepted, excepted, could could have have given given me me a a sense sense of of pleasure pleasure at at that that time, time, it it would would have have been been this this project project of of all all others. others. the the idea idea of of being being again again surrounded surrounded by by those those honest honest faces, faces, shining shining welcome welcome on on me; me; of of renewing renewing the the peacefulness peacefulness of of the the sweet sweet sunday sunday morning, morning, when when the the bells bells were were ringing, ringing, the the stones stones dropping dropping in in the the water, water, and and the the shadowy shadowy ships ships breaking breaking through through the the mist; mist; of of roaming roaming up up and and down down with with little little em'ly, em'ly, telling telling her her my my troubles, troubles, and and finding finding charms charms against against them them in in the the shells shells and and pebbles pebbles on on the the beach; beach; made made a a calm calm in in my my heart. heart. it it was was ruffled ruffled next next moment, moment, to to be be sure, sure, by by a a doubt doubt of of miss miss murdstone's murdstone's giving giving her her consent; consent; but but even even that that was was set set at at rest rest soon, soon, for for she she came came out out to to take take an an evening evening grope grope in in the the store-closet store-closet while while we we were were yet yet in in conversation, conversation, and and peggotty, peggotty, with with a a boldness boldness that that amazed amazed me, me, broached broached the the topic topic on on the the spot. spot. 'the 'the boy boy will will be be idle idle there,' there,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, looking looking into into a a pickle-jar, pickle-jar, 'and 'and idleness idleness is is the the root root of of all all evil. evil. but, but, to to be be sure, sure, he he would would be be idle idle here here -- -- or or anywhere, anywhere, in in my my opinion.' opinion.' peggotty peggotty had had an an angry angry answer answer ready, ready, i i could could see; see; but but she she swallowed swallowed it it for for my my sake, sake, and and remained remained silent. silent. 'humph!' 'humph!' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, still still keeping keeping her her eye eye on on the the pickles; pickles; 'it 'it is is of of more more importance importance than than anything anything else else -- -- it it is is of of paramount paramount importance importance -- -- that that my my brother brother should should not not be be disturbed disturbed or or made made uncomfortable. uncomfortable. i i suppose suppose i i had had better better say say yes.' yes.' i i thanked thanked her, her, without without making making any any demonstration demonstration of of joy, joy, lest lest it it should should induce induce her her to to withdraw withdraw her her assent. assent. nor nor could could i i help help thinking thinking this this a a prudent prudent course, course, since since she she looked looked at at me me out out of of the the pickle-jar, pickle-jar, with with as as great great an an access access of of sourness sourness as as if if her her black black eyes eyes had had absorbed absorbed its its contents. contents. however, however, the the permission permission was was given, given, and and was was never never retracted; retracted; for for when when the the month month was was out, out, peggotty peggotty and and i i were were ready ready to to depart. depart. mr. mr. barkis barkis came came into into the the house house for for peggotty's peggotty's boxes. boxes. i i had had never never known known him him to to pass pass the the garden-gate garden-gate before, before, but but on on this this occasion occasion he he came came into into the the house. house. and and he he gave gave me me a a look look as as he he shouldered shouldered the the largest largest box box and and went went out, out, which which i i thought thought had had meaning meaning in in it, it, if if meaning meaning could could ever ever be be said said to to find find its its way way into into mr. mr. barkis's barkis's visage. visage. peggotty peggotty was was naturally naturally in in low low spirits spirits at at leaving leaving what what had had been been her her home home so so many many years, years, and and where where the the two two strong strong attachments attachments of of her her life life -- -- for for my my mother mother and and myself myself -- -- had had been been formed. formed. she she had had been been walking walking in in the the churchyard, churchyard, too, too, very very early; early; and and she she got got into into the the cart, cart, and and sat sat in in it it with with her her handkerchief handkerchief at at her her eyes. eyes. so so long long as as she she remained remained in in this this condition, condition, mr. mr. barkis barkis gave gave no no sign sign of of life life whatever. whatever. he he sat sat in in his his usual usual place place and and attitude attitude like like a a great great stuffed stuffed figure. figure. but but when when she she began began to to look look about about her, her, and and to to speak speak to to me, me, he he nodded nodded his his head head and and grinned grinned several several times. times. i i have have not not the the least least notion notion at at whom, whom, or or what what he he meant meant by by it. it. 'it's 'it's a a beautiful beautiful day, day, mr. mr. barkis!' barkis!' i i said, said, as as an an act act of of politeness. politeness. 'it 'it ain't ain't bad,' bad,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, who who generally generally qualified qualified his his speech, speech, and and rarely rarely committed committed himself. himself. 'peggotty 'peggotty is is quite quite comfortable comfortable now, now, mr. mr. barkis,' barkis,' i i remarked, remarked, for for his his satisfaction. satisfaction. 'is 'is she, she, though?' though?' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. after after reflecting reflecting about about it, it, with with a a sagacious sagacious air, air, mr. mr. barkis barkis eyed eyed her, her, and and said: said: 'are 'are you pretty pretty comfortable?' comfortable?' peggotty peggotty laughed, laughed, and and answered answered in in the the affirmative. affirmative. 'but 'but really really and and truly, truly, you know. know. are are you?' growled growled mr. mr. barkis, barkis, sliding sliding nearer nearer to to her her on on the the seat, seat, and and nudging nudging her her with with his his elbow. elbow. 'are 'are you? really really and and truly truly pretty pretty comfortable? comfortable? are are you? eh?' eh?' at at each each of of these these inquiries inquiries mr. mr. barkis barkis shuffled shuffled nearer nearer to to her, her, and and gave gave her her another another nudge; nudge; so so that that at at last last we we were were all all crowded crowded together together in in the the left-hand left-hand corner corner of of the the cart, cart, and and i i was was so so squeezed squeezed that that i i could could hardly hardly bear bear it. it. peggotty peggotty calling calling his his attention attention to to my my sufferings, sufferings, mr. mr. barkis barkis gave gave me me a a little little more more room room at at once, once, and and got got away away by by degrees. degrees. but but i i could could not not help help observing observing that that he he seemed seemed to to think think he he had had hit hit upon upon a a wonderful wonderful expedient expedient for for expressing expressing himself himself in in a a neat, neat, agreeable, agreeable, and and pointed pointed manner, manner, without without the the inconvenience inconvenience of of inventing inventing conversation. conversation. he he manifestly manifestly chuckled chuckled over over it it for for some some time. time. by by and and by by he he turned turned to to peggotty peggotty again, again, and and repeating, repeating, 'are 'are you pretty pretty comfortable comfortable though?' though?' bore bore down down upon upon us us as as before, before, until until the the breath breath was was nearly nearly edged edged out out of of my my body. body. by by and and by by he he made made another another descent descent upon upon us us with with the the same same inquiry, inquiry, and and the the same same result. result. at at length, length, i i got got up up whenever whenever i i saw saw him him coming, coming, and and standing standing on on the the foot-board, foot-board, pretended pretended to to look look at at the the prospect; prospect; after after which which i i did did very very well. well. he he was was so so polite polite as as to to stop stop at at a a public-house, public-house, expressly expressly on on our our account, account, and and entertain entertain us us with with broiled broiled mutton mutton and and beer. beer. even even when when peggotty peggotty was was in in the the act act of of drinking, drinking, he he was was seized seized with with one one of of those those approaches, approaches, and and almost almost choked choked her. her. but but as as we we drew drew nearer nearer to to the the end end of of our our journey, journey, he he had had more more to to do do and and less less time time for for gallantry; gallantry; and and when when we we got got on on yarmouth yarmouth pavement, pavement, we we were were all all too too much much shaken shaken and and jolted, jolted, i i apprehend, apprehend, to to have have any any leisure leisure for for anything anything else. else. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and ham ham waited waited for for us us at at the the old old place. place. they they received received me me and and peggotty peggotty in in an an affectionate affectionate manner, manner, and and shook shook hands hands with with mr. mr. barkis, barkis, who, who, with with his his hat hat on on the the very very back back of of his his head, head, and and a a shame-faced shame-faced leer leer upon upon his his countenance, countenance, and and pervading pervading his his very very legs, legs, presented presented but but a a vacant vacant appearance, appearance, i i thought. thought. they they each each took took one one of of peggotty's peggotty's trunks, trunks, and and we we were were going going away, away, when when mr. mr. barkis barkis solemnly solemnly made made a a sign sign to to me me with with his his forefinger forefinger to to come come under under an an archway. archway. 'i 'i say,' say,' growled growled mr. mr. barkis, barkis, 'it 'it was was all all right.' right.' i i looked looked up up into into his his face, face, and and answered, answered, with with an an attempt attempt to to be be very very profound: profound: 'oh!' 'oh!' 'it 'it didn't didn't come come to to a a end end there,' there,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, nodding nodding confidentially. confidentially. 'it 'it was was all all right.' right.' again again i i answered, answered, 'oh!' 'oh!' 'you know know who who was was willin',' willin',' said said my my friend. friend. 'it 'it was was barkis, barkis, and and barkis barkis only.' only.' i i nodded nodded assent. assent. 'it's 'it's all all right,' right,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, shaking shaking hands; hands; 'i'm 'i'm a a friend friend of of your'n. your'n. you made made it it all all right, right, first. first. it's it's all all right.' right.' in in his his attempts attempts to to be be particularly particularly lucid, lucid, mr. mr. barkis barkis was was so so extremely extremely mysterious, mysterious, that that i i might might have have stood stood looking looking in in his his face face for for an an hour, hour, and and most most assuredly assuredly should should have have got got as as much much information information out out of of it it as as out out of of the the face face of of a a clock clock that that had had stopped, stopped, but but for for peggotty's peggotty's calling calling me me away. away. as as we we were were going going along, along, she she asked asked me me what what he he had had said; said; and and i i told told her her he he had had said said it it was was all all right. right. 'like 'like his his impudence,' impudence,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'but 'but i i don't don't mind mind that! that! davy davy dear, dear, what what should should you think think if if i i was was to to think think of of being being married?' married?' 'why 'why -- -- i i suppose suppose you would would like like me me as as much much then, then, peggotty, peggotty, as as you do do now?' now?' i i returned, returned, after after a a little little consideration. consideration. greatly greatly to to the the astonishment astonishment of of the the passengers passengers in in the the street, street, as as well well as as of of her her relations relations going going on on before, before, the the good good soul soul was was obliged obliged to to stop stop and and embrace embrace me me on on the the spot, spot, with with many many protestations protestations of of her her unalterable unalterable love. love. 'tell 'tell me me what what should should you say, say, darling?' darling?' she she asked asked again, again, when when this this was was over, over, and and we we were were walking walking on. on. 'if 'if you were were thinking thinking of of being being married married -- -- to to mr. mr. barkis, barkis, peggotty?' peggotty?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i should should think think it it would would be be a a very very good good thing. thing. for for then then you know, know, peggotty, peggotty, you would would always always have have the the horse horse and and cart cart to to bring bring you over over to to see see me, me, and and could could come come for for nothing, nothing, and and be be sure sure of of coming.' coming.' 'the 'the sense sense of of the the dear!' dear!' cried cried peggotty. peggotty. 'what 'what i i have have been been thinking thinking of, of, this this month month back! back! yes, yes, my my precious; precious; and and i i think think i i should should be be more more independent independent altogether, altogether, you see; see; let let alone alone my my working working with with a a better better heart heart in in my my own own house, house, than than i i could could in in anybody anybody else's else's now. now. i i don't don't know know what what i i might might be be fit fit for, for, now, now, as as a a servant servant to to a a stranger. stranger. and and i i shall shall be be always always near near my my pretty's pretty's resting-place,' resting-place,' said said peggotty, peggotty, musing, musing, 'and 'and be be able able to to see see it it when when i i like; like; and and when when i i lie lie down down to to rest, rest, i i may may be be laid laid not not far far off off from from my my darling darling girl!' girl!' we we neither neither of of us us said said anything anything for for a a little little while. while. 'but 'but i i wouldn't wouldn't so so much much as as give give it it another another thought,' thought,' said said peggotty, peggotty, cheerily cheerily 'if 'if my my davy davy was was anyways anyways against against it it -- -- not not if if i i had had been been asked asked in in church church thirty thirty times times three three times times over, over, and and was was wearing wearing out out the the ring ring in in my my pocket.' pocket.' 'look 'look at at me, me, peggotty,' peggotty,' i i replied; replied; 'and 'and see see if if i i am am not not really really glad, glad, and and don't don't truly truly wish wish it!' it!' as as indeed indeed i i did, did, with with all all my my heart. heart. 'well, 'well, my my life,' life,' said said peggotty, peggotty, giving giving me me a a squeeze, squeeze, 'i 'i have have thought thought of of it it night night and and day, day, every every way way i i can, can, and and i i hope hope the the right right way; way; but but i'll i'll think think of of it it again, again, and and speak speak to to my my brother brother about about it, it, and and in in the the meantime meantime we'll we'll keep keep it it to to ourselves, ourselves, davy, davy, you and and me. me. barkis barkis is is a a good good plain plain creature,' creature,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and if if i i tried tried to to do do my my duty duty by by him, him, i i think think it it would would be be my my fault fault if if i i wasn't wasn't -- -- if if i i wasn't wasn't pretty pretty comfortable,' comfortable,' said said peggotty, peggotty, laughing laughing heartily. heartily. this this quotation quotation from from mr. mr. barkis barkis was was so so appropriate, appropriate, and and tickled tickled us us both both so so much, much, that that we we laughed laughed again again and and again, again, and and were were quite quite in in a a pleasant pleasant humour humour when when we we came came within within view view of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's cottage. cottage. it it looked looked just just the the same, same, except except that that it it may, may, perhaps, perhaps, have have shrunk shrunk a a little little in in my my eyes; eyes; and and mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was waiting waiting at at the the door door as as if if she she had had stood stood there there ever ever since. since. all all within within was was the the same, same, down down to to the the seaweed seaweed in in the the blue blue mug mug in in my my bedroom. bedroom. i i went went into into the the out-house out-house to to look look about about me; me; and and the the very very same same lobsters, lobsters, crabs, crabs, and and crawfish crawfish possessed possessed by by the the same same desire desire to to pinch pinch the the world world in in general, general, appeared appeared to to be be in in the the same same state state of of conglomeration conglomeration in in the the same same old old corner. corner. but but there there was was no no little little em'ly em'ly to to be be seen, seen, so so i i asked asked mr. mr. peggotty peggotty where where she she was. was. 'she's 'she's at at school, school, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, wiping wiping the the heat heat consequent consequent on on the the porterage porterage of of peggotty's peggotty's box box from from his his forehead; forehead; 'she'll 'she'll be be home,' home,' looking looking at at the the dutch dutch clock, clock, 'in 'in from from twenty twenty minutes minutes to to half-an-hour's half-an-hour's time. time. we we all all on on us us feel feel the the loss loss of of her, her, bless bless ye!' ye!' mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge moaned. moaned. 'cheer 'cheer up, up, mawther!' mawther!' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i feel feel it it more more than than anybody anybody else,' else,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge; gummidge; 'i'm 'i'm a a lone lone lorn lorn creetur', creetur', and and she she used used to to be be a'most a'most the the only only thing thing that that didn't didn't go go contrary contrary with with me.' me.' mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, whimpering whimpering and and shaking shaking her her head, head, applied applied herself herself to to blowing blowing the the fire. fire. mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, looking looking round round upon upon us us while while she she was was so so engaged, engaged, said said in in a a low low voice, voice, which which he he shaded shaded with with his his hand: hand: 'the 'the old old 'un!' 'un!' from from this this i i rightly rightly conjectured conjectured that that no no improvement improvement had had taken taken place place since since my my last last visit visit in in the the state state of of mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's spirits. spirits. now, now, the the whole whole place place was, was, or or it it should should have have been, been, quite quite as as delightful delightful a a place place as as ever; ever; and and yet yet it it did did not not impress impress me me in in the the same same way. way. i i felt felt rather rather disappointed disappointed with with it. it. perhaps perhaps it it was was because because little little em'ly em'ly was was not not at at home. home. i i knew knew the the way way by by which which she she would would come, come, and and presently presently found found myself myself strolling strolling along along the the path path to to meet meet her. her. a a figure figure appeared appeared in in the the distance distance before before long, long, and and i i soon soon knew knew it it to to be be em'ly, em'ly, who who was was a a little little creature creature still still in in stature, stature, though though she she was was grown. grown. but but when when she she drew drew nearer, nearer, and and i i saw saw her her blue blue eyes eyes looking looking bluer, bluer, and and her her dimpled dimpled face face looking looking brighter, brighter, and and her her whole whole self self prettier prettier and and gayer, gayer, a a curious curious feeling feeling came came over over me me that that made made me me pretend pretend not not to to know know her, her, and and pass pass by by as as if if i i were were looking looking at at something something a a long long way way off. off. i i have have done done such such a a thing thing since since in in later later life, life, or or i i am am mistaken. mistaken. little little em'ly em'ly didn't didn't care care a a bit. bit. she she saw saw me me well well enough; enough; but but instead instead of of turning turning round round and and calling calling after after me, me, ran ran away away laughing. laughing. this this obliged obliged me me to to run run after after her, her, and and she she ran ran so so fast fast that that we we were were very very near near the the cottage cottage before before i i caught caught her. her. 'oh, 'oh, it's it's you, is is it?' it?' said said little little em'ly. em'ly. 'why, 'why, you knew knew who who it it was, was, em'ly,' em'ly,' said said i. i. 'and 'and didn't didn't you know know who who it it was?' was?' said said em'ly. em'ly. i i was was going going to to kiss kiss her, her, but but she she covered covered her her cherry cherry lips lips with with her her hands, hands, and and said said she she wasn't wasn't a a baby baby now, now, and and ran ran away, away, laughing laughing more more than than ever, ever, into into the the house. house. she she seemed seemed to to delight delight in in teasing teasing me, me, which which was was a a change change in in her her i i wondered wondered at at very very much. much. the the tea tea table table was was ready, ready, and and our our little little locker locker was was put put out out in in its its old old place, place, but but instead instead of of coming coming to to sit sit by by me, me, she she went went and and bestowed bestowed her her company company upon upon that that grumbling grumbling mrs. mrs. gummidge: gummidge: and and on on mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's inquiring inquiring why, why, rumpled rumpled her her hair hair all all over over her her face face to to hide hide it, it, and and could could do do nothing nothing but but laugh. laugh. 'a 'a little little puss, puss, it it is!' is!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, patting patting her her with with his his great great hand. hand. 'so 'so sh' sh' is! is! so so sh' sh' is!' is!' cried cried ham. ham. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy davy bor', bor', so so sh' sh' is!' is!' and and he he sat sat and and chuckled chuckled at at her her for for some some time, time, in in a a state state of of mingled mingled admiration admiration and and delight, delight, that that made made his his face face a a burning burning red. red. little little em'ly em'ly was was spoiled spoiled by by them them all, all, in in fact; fact; and and by by no no one one more more than than mr. mr. peggotty peggotty himself, himself, whom whom she she could could have have coaxed coaxed into into anything, anything, by by only only going going and and laying laying her her cheek cheek against against his his rough rough whisker. whisker. that that was was my my opinion, opinion, at at least, least, when when i i saw saw her her do do it; it; and and i i held held mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to be be thoroughly thoroughly in in the the right. right. but but she she was was so so affectionate affectionate and and sweet-natured, sweet-natured, and and had had such such a a pleasant pleasant manner manner of of being being both both sly sly and and shy shy at at once, once, that that she she captivated captivated me me more more than than ever. ever. she she was was tender-hearted, tender-hearted, too; too; for for when, when, as as we we sat sat round round the the fire fire after after tea, tea, an an allusion allusion was was made made by by mr. mr. peggotty peggotty over over his his pipe pipe to to the the loss loss i i had had sustained, sustained, the the tears tears stood stood in in her her eyes, eyes, and and she she looked looked at at me me so so kindly kindly across across the the table, table, that that i i felt felt quite quite thankful thankful to to her. her. 'ah!' 'ah!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, taking taking up up her her curls, curls, and and running running them them over over his his hand hand like like water, water, 'here's 'here's another another orphan, orphan, you see, see, sir. sir. and and here,' here,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, giving giving ham ham a a backhanded backhanded knock knock in in the the chest, chest, 'is 'is another another of of 'em, 'em, though though he he don't don't look look much much like like it.' it.' 'if 'if i i had had you for for my my guardian, guardian, mr. mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' said said i, i, shaking shaking my my head, head, 'i 'i don't don't think think i i should should feel feel much much like like it.' it.' 'well 'well said, said, mas'r mas'r davy davy bor'!' bor'!' cried cried ham, ham, in in an an ecstasy. ecstasy. 'hoorah! 'hoorah! well well said! said! nor nor more more you wouldn't! wouldn't! hor! hor! hor!' hor!' -- -- here here he he returned returned mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's back-hander, back-hander, and and little little em'ly em'ly got got up up and and kissed kissed mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'and 'and how's how's your your friend, friend, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to me. me. 'steerforth?' 'steerforth?' said said i. i. 'that's 'that's the the name!' name!' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, turning turning to to ham. ham. 'i 'i knowed knowed it it was was something something in in our our way.' way.' 'you said said it it was was rudderford,' rudderford,' observed observed ham, ham, laughing. laughing. 'well!' 'well!' retorted retorted mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'and 'and ye ye steer steer with with a a rudder, rudder, don't don't ye? ye? it it ain't ain't fur fur off. off. how how is is he, he, sir?' sir?' 'he 'he was was very very well well indeed indeed when when i i came came away, away, mr. mr. peggotty.' peggotty.' 'there's 'there's a a friend!' friend!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, stretching stretching out out his his pipe. pipe. 'there's 'there's a a friend, friend, if if you talk talk of of friends! friends! why, why, lord lord love love my my heart heart alive, alive, if if it it ain't ain't a a treat treat to to look look at at him!' him!' 'he 'he is is very very handsome, handsome, is is he he not?' not?' said said i, i, my my heart heart warming warming with with this this praise. praise. 'handsome!' 'handsome!' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'he 'he stands stands up up to to you like like -- -- like like a a -- -- why why i i don't don't know know what what he he don't don't stand stand up up to to you like. like. he's he's so so bold!' bold!' 'yes! 'yes! that's that's just just his his character,' character,' said said i. i. 'he's 'he's as as brave brave as as a a lion, lion, and and you can't can't think think how how frank frank he he is, is, mr. mr. peggotty.' peggotty.' 'and 'and i i do do suppose, suppose, now,' now,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, looking looking at at me me through through the the smoke smoke of of his his pipe, pipe, 'that 'that in in the the way way of of book-larning book-larning he'd he'd take take the the wind wind out out of of a'most a'most anything.' anything.' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i, i, delighted; delighted; 'he 'he knows knows everything. everything. he he is is astonishingly astonishingly clever.' clever.' 'there's 'there's a a friend!' friend!' murmured murmured mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a grave grave toss toss of of his his head. head. 'nothing 'nothing seems seems to to cost cost him him any any trouble,' trouble,' said said i. i. 'he 'he knows knows a a task task if if he he only only looks looks at at it. it. he he is is the the best best cricketer cricketer you ever ever saw. saw. he he will will give give you almost almost as as many many men men as as you like like at at draughts, draughts, and and beat beat you easily.' easily.' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty gave gave his his head head another another toss, toss, as as much much as as to to say: say: 'of 'of course course he he will.' will.' 'he 'he is is such such a a speaker,' speaker,' i i pursued, pursued, 'that 'that he he can can win win anybody anybody over; over; and and i i don't don't know know what what you'd you'd say say if if you were were to to hear hear him him sing, sing, mr. mr. peggotty.' peggotty.' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty gave gave his his head head another another toss, toss, as as much much as as to to say: say: 'i 'i have have no no doubt doubt of of it.' it.' 'then, 'then, he's he's such such a a generous, generous, fine, fine, noble noble fellow,' fellow,' said said i, i, quite quite carried carried away away by by my my favourite favourite theme, theme, 'that 'that it's it's hardly hardly possible possible to to give give him him as as much much praise praise as as he he deserves. deserves. i i am am sure sure i i can can never never feel feel thankful thankful enough enough for for the the generosity generosity with with which which he he has has protected protected me, me, so so much much younger younger and and lower lower in in the the school school than than himself.' himself.' i i was was running running on, on, very very fast fast indeed, indeed, when when my my eyes eyes rested rested on on little little em'ly's em'ly's face, face, which which was was bent bent forward forward over over the the table, table, listening listening with with the the deepest deepest attention, attention, her her breath breath held, held, her her blue blue eyes eyes sparkling sparkling like like jewels, jewels, and and the the colour colour mantling mantling in in her her cheeks. cheeks. she she looked looked so so extraordinarily extraordinarily earnest earnest and and pretty, pretty, that that i i stopped stopped in in a a sort sort of of wonder; wonder; and and they they all all observed observed her her at at the the same same time, time, for for as as i i stopped, stopped, they they laughed laughed and and looked looked at at her. her. 'em'ly 'em'ly is is like like me,' me,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and would would like like to to see see him.' him.' em'ly em'ly was was confused confused by by our our all all observing observing her, her, and and hung hung down down her her head, head, and and her her face face was was covered covered with with blushes. blushes. glancing glancing up up presently presently through through her her stray stray curls, curls, and and seeing seeing that that we we were were all all looking looking at at her her still still (i (i am am sure sure i, i, for for one, one, could could have have looked looked at at her her for for hours), hours), she she ran ran away, away, and and kept kept away away till till it it was was nearly nearly bedtime. bedtime. i i lay lay down down in in the the old old little little bed bed in in the the stern stern of of the the boat, boat, and and the the wind wind came came moaning moaning on on across across the the flat flat as as it it had had done done before. before. but but i i could could not not help help fancying, fancying, now, now, that that it it moaned moaned of of those those who who were were gone; gone; and and instead instead of of thinking thinking that that the the sea sea might might rise rise in in the the night night and and float float the the boat boat away, away, i i thought thought of of the the sea sea that that had had risen, risen, since since i i last last heard heard those those sounds, sounds, and and drowned drowned my my happy happy home. home. i i recollect, recollect, as as the the wind wind and and water water began began to to sound sound fainter fainter in in my my ears, ears, putting putting a a short short clause clause into into my my prayers, prayers, petitioning petitioning that that i i might might grow grow up up to to marry marry little little em'ly, em'ly, and and so so dropping dropping lovingly lovingly asleep. asleep. the the days days passed passed pretty pretty much much as as they they had had passed passed before, before, except except -- -- it it was was a a great great exception exception -- -- that that little little em'ly em'ly and and i i seldom seldom wandered wandered on on the the beach beach now. now. she she had had tasks tasks to to learn, learn, and and needle-work needle-work to to do; do; and and was was absent absent during during a a great great part part of of each each day. day. but but i i felt felt that that we we should should not not have have had had those those old old wanderings, wanderings, even even if if it it had had been been otherwise. otherwise. wild wild and and full full of of childish childish whims whims as as em'ly em'ly was, was, she she was was more more of of a a little little woman woman than than i i had had supposed. supposed. she she seemed seemed to to have have got got a a great great distance distance away away from from me, me, in in little little more more than than a a year. year. she she liked liked me, me, but but she she laughed laughed at at me, me, and and tormented tormented me; me; and and when when i i went went to to meet meet her, her, stole stole home home another another way, way, and and was was laughing laughing at at the the door door when when i i came came back, back, disappointed. disappointed. the the best best times times were were when when she she sat sat quietly quietly at at work work in in the the doorway, doorway, and and i i sat sat on on the the wooden wooden step step at at her her feet, feet, reading reading to to her. her. it it seems seems to to me, me, at at this this hour, hour, that that i i have have never never seen seen such such sunlight sunlight as as on on those those bright bright april april afternoons; afternoons; that that i i have have never never seen seen such such a a sunny sunny little little figure figure as as i i used used to to see, see, sitting sitting in in the the doorway doorway of of the the old old boat; boat; that that i i have have never never beheld beheld such such sky, sky, such such water, water, such such glorified glorified ships ships sailing sailing away away into into golden golden air. air. on on the the very very first first evening evening after after our our arrival, arrival, mr. mr. barkis barkis appeared appeared in in an an exceedingly exceedingly vacant vacant and and awkward awkward condition, condition, and and with with a a bundle bundle of of oranges oranges tied tied up up in in a a handkerchief. handkerchief. as as he he made made no no allusion allusion of of any any kind kind to to this this property, property, he he was was supposed supposed to to have have left left it it behind behind him him by by accident accident when when he he went went away; away; until until ham, ham, running running after after him him to to restore restore it, it, came came back back with with the the information information that that it it was was intended intended for for peggotty. peggotty. after after that that occasion occasion he he appeared appeared every every evening evening at at exactly exactly the the same same hour, hour, and and always always with with a a little little bundle, bundle, to to which which he he never never alluded, alluded, and and which which he he regularly regularly put put behind behind the the door door and and left left there. there. these these offerings offerings of of affection affection were were of of a a most most various various and and eccentric eccentric description. description. among among them them i i remember remember a a double double set set of of pigs' pigs' trotters, trotters, a a huge huge pin-cushion, pin-cushion, half half a a bushel bushel or or so so of of apples, apples, a a pair pair of of jet jet earrings, earrings, some some spanish spanish onions, onions, a a box box of of dominoes, dominoes, a a canary canary bird bird and and cage, cage, and and a a leg leg of of pickled pickled pork. pork. mr. mr. barkis's barkis's wooing, wooing, as as i i remember remember it, it, was was altogether altogether of of a a peculiar peculiar kind. kind. he he very very seldom seldom said said anything; anything; but but would would sit sit by by the the fire fire in in much much the the same same attitude attitude as as he he sat sat in in his his cart, cart, and and stare stare heavily heavily at at peggotty, peggotty, who who was was opposite. opposite. one one night, night, being, being, as as i i suppose, suppose, inspired inspired by by love, love, he he made made a a dart dart at at the the bit bit of of wax-candle wax-candle she she kept kept for for her her thread, thread, and and put put it it in in his his waistcoat-pocket waistcoat-pocket and and carried carried it it off. off. after after that, that, his his great great delight delight was was to to produce produce it it when when it it was was wanted, wanted, sticking sticking to to the the lining lining of of his his pocket, pocket, in in a a partially partially melted melted state, state, and and pocket pocket it it again again when when it it was was done done with. with. he he seemed seemed to to enjoy enjoy himself himself very very much, much, and and not not to to feel feel at at all all called called upon upon to to talk. talk. even even when when he he took took peggotty peggotty out out for for a a walk walk on on the the flats, flats, he he had had no no uneasiness uneasiness on on that that head, head, i i believe; believe; contenting contenting himself himself with with now now and and then then asking asking her her if if she she was was pretty pretty comfortable; comfortable; and and i i remember remember that that sometimes, sometimes, after after he he was was gone, gone, peggotty peggotty would would throw throw her her apron apron over over her her face, face, and and laugh laugh for for half-an-hour. half-an-hour. indeed, indeed, we we were were all all more more or or less less amused, amused, except except that that miserable miserable mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, whose whose courtship courtship would would appear appear to to have have been been of of an an exactly exactly parallel parallel nature, nature, she she was was so so continually continually reminded reminded by by these these transactions transactions of of the the old old one. one. at at length, length, when when the the term term of of my my visit visit was was nearly nearly expired, expired, it it was was given given out out that that peggotty peggotty and and mr. mr. barkis barkis were were going going to to make make a a day's day's holiday holiday together, together, and and that that little little em'ly em'ly and and i i were were to to accompany accompany them. them. i i had had but but a a broken broken sleep sleep the the night night before, before, in in anticipation anticipation of of the the pleasure pleasure of of a a whole whole day day with with em'ly. em'ly. we we were were all all astir astir betimes betimes in in the the morning; morning; and and while while we we were were yet yet at at breakfast, breakfast, mr. mr. barkis barkis appeared appeared in in the the distance, distance, driving driving a a chaise-cart chaise-cart towards towards the the object object of of his his affections. affections. peggotty peggotty was was dressed dressed as as usual, usual, in in her her neat neat and and quiet quiet mourning; mourning; but but mr. mr. barkis barkis bloomed bloomed in in a a new new blue blue coat, coat, of of which which the the tailor tailor had had given given him him such such good good measure, measure, that that the the cuffs cuffs would would have have rendered rendered gloves gloves unnecessary unnecessary in in the the coldest coldest weather, weather, while while the the collar collar was was so so high high that that it it pushed pushed his his hair hair up up on on end end on on the the top top of of his his head. head. his his bright bright buttons, buttons, too, too, were were of of the the largest largest size. size. rendered rendered complete complete by by drab drab pantaloons pantaloons and and a a buff buff waistcoat, waistcoat, i i thought thought mr. mr. barkis barkis a a phenomenon phenomenon of of respectability. respectability. when when we we were were all all in in a a bustle bustle outside outside the the door, door, i i found found that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was prepared prepared with with an an old old shoe, shoe, which which was was to to be be thrown thrown after after us us for for luck, luck, and and which which he he offered offered to to mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge for for that that purpose. purpose. 'no. 'no. it it had had better better be be done done by by somebody somebody else, else, dan'l,' dan'l,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'i'm 'i'm a a lone lone lorn lorn creetur' creetur' myself, myself, and and everythink everythink that that reminds reminds me me of of creetur's creetur's that that ain't ain't lone lone and and lorn, lorn, goes goes contrary contrary with with me.' me.' 'come, 'come, old old gal!' gal!' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'take 'take and and heave heave it.' it.' 'no, 'no, dan'l,' dan'l,' returned returned mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, whimpering whimpering and and shaking shaking her her head. head. 'if 'if i i felt felt less, less, i i could could do do more. more. you don't don't feel feel like like me, me, dan'l; dan'l; thinks thinks don't don't go go contrary contrary with with you, nor nor you with with them; them; you had had better better do do it it yourself.' yourself.' but but here here peggotty, peggotty, who who had had been been going going about about from from one one to to another another in in a a hurried hurried way, way, kissing kissing everybody, everybody, called called out out from from the the cart, cart, in in which which we we all all were were by by this this time time (em'ly (em'ly and and i i on on two two little little chairs, chairs, side side by by side), side), that that mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge must must do do it. it. so so mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge did did it; it; and, and, i i am am sorry sorry to to relate, relate, cast cast a a damp damp upon upon the the festive festive character character of of our our departure, departure, by by immediately immediately bursting bursting into into tears, tears, and and sinking sinking subdued subdued into into the the arms arms of of ham, ham, with with the the declaration declaration that that she she knowed knowed she she was was a a burden, burden, and and had had better better be be carried carried to to the the house house at at once. once. which which i i really really thought thought was was a a sensible sensible idea, idea, that that ham ham might might have have acted acted on. on. away away we we went, went, however, however, on on our our holiday holiday excursion; excursion; and and the the first first thing thing we we did did was was to to stop stop at at a a church, church, where where mr. mr. barkis barkis tied tied the the horse horse to to some some rails, rails, and and went went in in with with peggotty, peggotty, leaving leaving little little em'ly em'ly and and me me alone alone in in the the chaise. chaise. i i took took that that occasion occasion to to put put my my arm arm round round em'ly's em'ly's waist, waist, and and propose propose that that as as i i was was going going away away so so very very soon soon now, now, we we should should determine determine to to be be very very affectionate affectionate to to one one another, another, and and very very happy, happy, all all day. day. little little em'ly em'ly consenting, consenting, and and allowing allowing me me to to kiss kiss her, her, i i became became desperate; desperate; informing informing her, her, i i recollect, recollect, that that i i never never could could love love another, another, and and that that i i was was prepared prepared to to shed shed the the blood blood of of anybody anybody who who should should aspire aspire to to her her affections. affections. how how merry merry little little em'ly em'ly made made herself herself about about it! it! with with what what a a demure demure assumption assumption of of being being immensely immensely older older and and wiser wiser than than i, i, the the fairy fairy little little woman woman said said i i was was 'a 'a silly silly boy'; boy'; and and then then laughed laughed so so charmingly charmingly that that i i forgot forgot the the pain pain of of being being called called by by that that disparaging disparaging name, name, in in the the pleasure pleasure of of looking looking at at her. her. mr. mr. barkis barkis and and peggotty peggotty were were a a good good while while in in the the church, church, but but came came out out at at last, last, and and then then we we drove drove away away into into the the country. country. as as we we were were going going along, along, mr. mr. barkis barkis turned turned to to me, me, and and said, said, with with a a wink, wink, -- -- by by the the by, by, i i should should hardly hardly have have thought, thought, before, before, that that he he could could wink: wink: 'what 'what name name was was it it as as i i wrote wrote up up in in the the cart?' cart?' 'clara 'clara peggotty,' peggotty,' i i answered. answered. 'what 'what name name would would it it be be as as i i should should write write up up now, now, if if there there was was a a tilt tilt here?' here?' 'clara 'clara peggotty, peggotty, again?' again?' i i suggested. suggested. 'clara 'clara peggotty peggotty barkis!' barkis!' he he returned, returned, and and burst burst into into a a roar roar of of laughter laughter that that shook shook the the chaise. chaise. in in a a word, word, they they were were married, married, and and had had gone gone into into the the church church for for no no other other purpose. purpose. peggotty peggotty was was resolved resolved that that it it should should be be quietly quietly done; done; and and the the clerk clerk had had given given her her away, away, and and there there had had been been no no witnesses witnesses of of the the ceremony. ceremony. she she was was a a little little confused confused when when mr. mr. barkis barkis made made this this abrupt abrupt announcement announcement of of their their union, union, and and could could not not hug hug me me enough enough in in token token of of her her unimpaired unimpaired affection; affection; but but she she soon soon became became herself herself again, again, and and said said she she was was very very glad glad it it was was over. over. we we drove drove to to a a little little inn inn in in a a by-road, by-road, where where we we were were expected, expected, and and where where we we had had a a very very comfortable comfortable dinner, dinner, and and passed passed the the day day with with great great satisfaction. satisfaction. if if peggotty peggotty had had been been married married every every day day for for the the last last ten ten years, years, she she could could hardly hardly have have been been more more at at her her ease ease about about it; it; it it made made no no sort sort of of difference difference in in her: her: she she was was just just the the same same as as ever, ever, and and went went out out for for a a stroll stroll with with little little em'ly em'ly and and me me before before tea, tea, while while mr. mr. barkis barkis philosophically philosophically smoked smoked his his pipe, pipe, and and enjoyed enjoyed himself, himself, i i suppose, suppose, with with the the contemplation contemplation of of his his happiness. happiness. if if so, so, it it sharpened sharpened his his appetite; appetite; for for i i distinctly distinctly call call to to mind mind that, that, although although he he had had eaten eaten a a good good deal deal of of pork pork and and greens greens at at dinner, dinner, and and had had finished finished off off with with a a fowl fowl or or two, two, he he was was obliged obliged to to have have cold cold boiled boiled bacon bacon for for tea, tea, and and disposed disposed of of a a large large quantity quantity without without any any emotion. emotion. i i have have often often thought, thought, since, since, what what an an odd, odd, innocent, innocent, out-of-the-way out-of-the-way kind kind of of wedding wedding it it must must have have been! been! we we got got into into the the chaise chaise again again soon soon after after dark, dark, and and drove drove cosily cosily back, back, looking looking up up at at the the stars, stars, and and talking talking about about them. them. i i was was their their chief chief exponent, exponent, and and opened opened mr. mr. barkis's barkis's mind mind to to an an amazing amazing extent. extent. i i told told him him all all i i knew, knew, but but he he would would have have believed believed anything anything i i might might have have taken taken it it into into my my head head to to impart impart to to him; him; for for he he had had a a profound profound veneration veneration for for my my abilities, abilities, and and informed informed his his wife wife in in my my hearing, hearing, on on that that very very occasion, occasion, that that i i was was 'a 'a young young roeshus' roeshus' -- -- by by which which i i think think he he meant meant prodigy. prodigy. when when we we had had exhausted exhausted the the subject subject of of the the stars, stars, or or rather rather when when i i had had exhausted exhausted the the mental mental faculties faculties of of mr. mr. barkis, barkis, little little em'ly em'ly and and i i made made a a cloak cloak of of an an old old wrapper, wrapper, and and sat sat under under it it for for the the rest rest of of the the journey. journey. ah, ah, how how i i loved loved her! her! what what happiness happiness (i (i thought) thought) if if we we were were married, married, and and were were going going away away anywhere anywhere to to live live among among the the trees trees and and in in the the fields, fields, never never growing growing older, older, never never growing growing wiser, wiser, children children ever, ever, rambling rambling hand hand in in hand hand through through sunshine sunshine and and among among flowery flowery meadows, meadows, laying laying down down our our heads heads on on moss moss at at night, night, in in a a sweet sweet sleep sleep of of purity purity and and peace, peace, and and buried buried by by the the birds birds when when we we were were dead! dead! some some such such picture, picture, with with no no real real world world in in it, it, bright bright with with the the light light of of our our innocence, innocence, and and vague vague as as the the stars stars afar afar off, off, was was in in my my mind mind all all the the way. way. i i am am glad glad to to think think there there were were two two such such guileless guileless hearts hearts at at peggotty's peggotty's marriage marriage as as little little em'ly's em'ly's and and mine. mine. i i am am glad glad to to think think the the loves loves and and graces graces took took such such airy airy forms forms in in its its homely homely procession. procession. well, well, we we came came to to the the old old boat boat again again in in good good time time at at night; night; and and there there mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. barkis barkis bade bade us us good-bye, good-bye, and and drove drove away away snugly snugly to to their their own own home. home. i i felt felt then, then, for for the the first first time, time, that that i i had had lost lost peggotty. peggotty. i i should should have have gone gone to to bed bed with with a a sore sore heart heart indeed indeed under under any any other other roof roof but but that that which which sheltered sheltered little little em'ly's em'ly's head. head. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and ham ham knew knew what what was was in in my my thoughts thoughts as as well well as as i i did, did, and and were were ready ready with with some some supper supper and and their their hospitable hospitable faces faces to to drive drive it it away. away. little little em'ly em'ly came came and and sat sat beside beside me me on on the the locker locker for for the the only only time time in in all all that that visit; visit; and and it it was was altogether altogether a a wonderful wonderful close close to to a a wonderful wonderful day. day. it it was was a a night night tide; tide; and and soon soon after after we we went went to to bed, bed, mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and ham ham went went out out to to fish. fish. i i felt felt very very brave brave at at being being left left alone alone in in the the solitary solitary house, house, the the protector protector of of em'ly em'ly and and mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, and and only only wished wished that that a a lion lion or or a a serpent, serpent, or or any any ill-disposed ill-disposed monster, monster, would would make make an an attack attack upon upon us, us, that that i i might might destroy destroy him, him, and and cover cover myself myself with with glory. glory. but but as as nothing nothing of of the the sort sort happened happened to to be be walking walking about about on on yarmouth yarmouth flats flats that that night, night, i i provided provided the the best best substitute substitute i i could could by by dreaming dreaming of of dragons dragons until until morning. morning. with with morning morning came came peggotty; peggotty; who who called called to to me, me, as as usual, usual, under under my my window window as as if if mr. mr. barkis barkis the the carrier carrier had had been been from from first first to to last last a a dream dream too. too. after after breakfast breakfast she she took took me me to to her her own own home, home, and and a a beautiful beautiful little little home home it it was. was. of of all all the the moveables moveables in in it, it, i i must must have have been been impressed impressed by by a a certain certain old old bureau bureau of of some some dark dark wood wood in in the the parlour parlour (the (the tile-floored tile-floored kitchen kitchen was was the the general general sitting-room), sitting-room), with with a a retreating retreating top top which which opened, opened, let let down, down, and and became became a a desk, desk, within within which which was was a a large large quarto quarto edition edition of of foxe's foxe's book book of of martyrs. martyrs. this this precious precious volume, volume, of of which which i i do do not not recollect recollect one one word, word, i i immediately immediately discovered discovered and and immediately immediately applied applied myself myself to; to; and and i i never never visited visited the the house house afterwards, afterwards, but but i i kneeled kneeled on on a a chair, chair, opened opened the the casket casket where where this this gem gem was was enshrined, enshrined, spread spread my my arms arms over over the the desk, desk, and and fell fell to to devouring devouring the the book book afresh. afresh. i i was was chiefly chiefly edified, edified, i i am am afraid, afraid, by by the the pictures, pictures, which which were were numerous, numerous, and and represented represented all all kinds kinds of of dismal dismal horrors; horrors; but but the the martyrs martyrs and and peggotty's peggotty's house house have have been been inseparable inseparable in in my my mind mind ever ever since, since, and and are are now. now. i i took took leave leave of of mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and ham, ham, and and mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, and and little little em'ly, em'ly, that that day; day; and and passed passed the the night night at at peggotty's, peggotty's, in in a a little little room room in in the the roof roof (with (with the the crocodile crocodile book book on on a a shelf shelf by by the the bed's bed's head) head) which which was was to to be be always always mine, mine, peggotty peggotty said, said, and and should should always always be be kept kept for for me me in in exactly exactly the the same same state. state. 'young 'young or or old, old, davy davy dear, dear, as as long long as as i i am am alive alive and and have have this this house house over over my my head,' head,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'you shall shall find find it it as as if if i i expected expected you here here directly directly minute. minute. i i shall shall keep keep it it every every day, day, as as i i used used to to keep keep your your old old little little room, room, my my darling; darling; and and if if you was was to to go go to to china, china, you might might think think of of it it as as being being kept kept just just the the same, same, all all the the time time you were were away.' away.' i i felt felt the the truth truth and and constancy constancy of of my my dear dear old old nurse, nurse, with with all all my my heart, heart, and and thanked thanked her her as as well well as as i i could. could. that that was was not not very very well, well, for for she she spoke spoke to to me me thus, thus, with with her her arms arms round round my my neck, neck, in in the the morning, morning, and and i i was was going going home home in in the the morning, morning, and and i i went went home home in in the the morning, morning, with with herself herself and and mr. mr. barkis barkis in in the the cart. cart. they they left left me me at at the the gate, gate, not not easily easily or or lightly; lightly; and and it it was was a a strange strange sight sight to to me me to to see see the the cart cart go go on, on, taking taking peggotty peggotty away, away, and and leaving leaving me me under under the the old old elm-trees elm-trees looking looking at at the the house, house, in in which which there there was was no no face face to to look look on on mine mine with with love love or or liking liking any any more. more. and and now now i i fell fell into into a a state state of of neglect, neglect, which which i i cannot cannot look look back back upon upon without without compassion. compassion. i i fell fell at at once once into into a a solitary solitary condition, condition, -- -- apart apart from from all all friendly friendly notice, notice, apart apart from from the the society society of of all all other other boys boys of of my my own own age, age, apart apart from from all all companionship companionship but but my my own own spiritless spiritless thoughts, thoughts, -- -- which which seems seems to to cast cast its its gloom gloom upon upon this this paper paper as as i i write. write. what what would would i i have have given, given, to to have have been been sent sent to to the the hardest hardest school school that that ever ever was was kept! kept! -- -- to to have have been been taught taught something, something, anyhow, anyhow, anywhere! anywhere! no no such such hope hope dawned dawned upon upon me. me. they they disliked disliked me; me; and and they they sullenly, sullenly, sternly, sternly, steadily, steadily, overlooked overlooked me. me. i i think think mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's means means were were straitened straitened at at about about this this time; time; but but it it is is little little to to the the purpose. purpose. he he could could not not bear bear me; me; and and in in putting putting me me from from him him he he tried, tried, as as i i believe, believe, to to put put away away the the notion notion that that i i had had any any claim claim upon upon him him -- -- and and succeeded. succeeded. i i was was not not actively actively ill-used. ill-used. i i was was not not beaten, beaten, or or starved; starved; but but the the wrong wrong that that was was done done to to me me had had no no intervals intervals of of relenting, relenting, and and was was done done in in a a systematic, systematic, passionless passionless manner. manner. day day after after day, day, week week after after week, week, month month after after month, month, i i was was coldly coldly neglected. neglected. i i wonder wonder sometimes, sometimes, when when i i think think of of it, it, what what they they would would have have done done if if i i had had been been taken taken with with an an illness; illness; whether whether i i should should have have lain lain down down in in my my lonely lonely room, room, and and languished languished through through it it in in my my usual usual solitary solitary way, way, or or whether whether anybody anybody would would have have helped helped me me out. out. when when mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone were were at at home, home, i i took took my my meals meals with with them; them; in in their their absence, absence, i i ate ate and and drank drank by by myself. myself. at at all all times times i i lounged lounged about about the the house house and and neighbourhood neighbourhood quite quite disregarded, disregarded, except except that that they they were were jealous jealous of of my my making making any any friends: friends: thinking, thinking, perhaps, perhaps, that that if if i i did, did, i i might might complain complain to to someone. someone. for for this this reason, reason, though though mr. mr. chillip chillip often often asked asked me me to to go go and and see see him him (he (he was was a a widower, widower, having, having, some some years years before before that, that, lost lost a a little little small small light-haired light-haired wife, wife, whom whom i i can can just just remember remember connecting connecting in in my my own own thoughts thoughts with with a a pale pale tortoise-shell tortoise-shell cat), cat), it it was was but but seldom seldom that that i i enjoyed enjoyed the the happiness happiness of of passing passing an an afternoon afternoon in in his his closet closet of of a a surgery; surgery; reading reading some some book book that that was was new new to to me, me, with with the the smell smell of of the the whole whole pharmacopoeia pharmacopoeia coming coming up up my my nose, nose, or or pounding pounding something something in in a a mortar mortar under under his his mild mild directions. directions. for for the the same same reason, reason, added added no no doubt doubt to to the the old old dislike dislike of of her, her, i i was was seldom seldom allowed allowed to to visit visit peggotty. peggotty. faithful faithful to to her her promise, promise, she she either either came came to to see see me, me, or or met met me me somewhere somewhere near, near, once once every every week, week, and and never never empty-handed; empty-handed; but but many many and and bitter bitter were were the the disappointments disappointments i i had, had, in in being being refused refused permission permission to to pay pay a a visit visit to to her her at at her her house. house. some some few few times, times, however, however, at at long long intervals, intervals, i i was was allowed allowed to to go go there; there; and and then then i i found found out out that that mr. mr. barkis barkis was was something something of of a a miser, miser, or or as as peggotty peggotty dutifully dutifully expressed expressed it, it, was was 'a 'a little little near', near', and and kept kept a a heap heap of of money money in in a a box box under under his his bed, bed, which which he he pretended pretended was was only only full full of of coats coats and and trousers. trousers. in in this this coffer, coffer, his his riches riches hid hid themselves themselves with with such such a a tenacious tenacious modesty, modesty, that that the the smallest smallest instalments instalments could could only only be be tempted tempted out out by by artifice; artifice; so so that that peggotty peggotty had had to to prepare prepare a a long long and and elaborate elaborate scheme, scheme, a a very very gunpowder gunpowder plot, plot, for for every every saturday's saturday's expenses. expenses. all all this this time time i i was was so so conscious conscious of of the the waste waste of of any any promise promise i i had had given, given, and and of of my my being being utterly utterly neglected, neglected, that that i i should should have have been been perfectly perfectly miserable, miserable, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, but but for for the the old old books. books. they they were were my my only only comfort; comfort; and and i i was was as as true true to to them them as as they they were were to to me, me, and and read read them them over over and and over over i i don't don't know know how how many many times times more. more. i i now now approach approach a a period period of of my my life, life, which which i i can can never never lose lose the the remembrance remembrance of, of, while while i i remember remember anything: anything: and and the the recollection recollection of of which which has has often, often, without without my my invocation, invocation, come come before before me me like like a a ghost, ghost, and and haunted haunted happier happier times. times. i i had had been been out, out, one one day, day, loitering loitering somewhere, somewhere, in in the the listless, listless, meditative meditative manner manner that that my my way way of of life life engendered, engendered, when, when, turning turning the the corner corner of of a a lane lane near near our our house, house, i i came came upon upon mr. mr. murdstone murdstone walking walking with with a a gentleman. gentleman. i i was was confused, confused, and and was was going going by by them, them, when when the the gentleman gentleman cried: cried: 'what! 'what! brooks!' brooks!' 'no, 'no, sir, sir, david david copperfield,' copperfield,' i i said. said. 'don't 'don't tell tell me. me. you are are brooks,' brooks,' said said the the gentleman. gentleman. 'you are are brooks brooks of of sheffield. sheffield. that's that's your your name.' name.' at at these these words, words, i i observed observed the the gentleman gentleman more more attentively. attentively. his his laugh laugh coming coming to to my my remembrance remembrance too, too, i i knew knew him him to to be be mr. mr. quinion, quinion, whom whom i i had had gone gone over over to to lowestoft lowestoft with with mr. mr. murdstone murdstone to to see, see, before before -- -- it it is is no no matter matter -- -- i i need need not not recall recall when. when. 'and 'and how how do do you get get on, on, and and where where are are you being being educated, educated, brooks?' brooks?' said said mr. mr. quinion. quinion. he he had had put put his his hand hand upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, and and turned turned me me about, about, to to walk walk with with them. them. i i did did not not know know what what to to reply, reply, and and glanced glanced dubiously dubiously at at mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'he 'he is is at at home home at at present,' present,' said said the the latter. latter. 'he 'he is is not not being being educated educated anywhere. anywhere. i i don't don't know know what what to to do do with with him. him. he he is is a a difficult difficult subject.' subject.' that that old, old, double double look look was was on on me me for for a a moment; moment; and and then then his his eyes eyes darkened darkened with with a a frown, frown, as as it it turned, turned, in in its its aversion, aversion, elsewhere. elsewhere. 'humph!' 'humph!' said said mr. mr. quinion, quinion, looking looking at at us us both, both, i i thought. thought. 'fine 'fine weather!' weather!' silence silence ensued, ensued, and and i i was was considering considering how how i i could could best best disengage disengage my my shoulder shoulder from from his his hand, hand, and and go go away, away, when when he he said: said: 'i 'i suppose suppose you are are a a pretty pretty sharp sharp fellow fellow still? still? eh, eh, brooks?' brooks?' 'aye! 'aye! he he is is sharp sharp enough,' enough,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, impatiently. impatiently. 'you had had better better let let him him go. go. he he will will not not thank thank you for for troubling troubling him.' him.' on on this this hint, hint, mr. mr. quinion quinion released released me, me, and and i i made made the the best best of of my my way way home. home. looking looking back back as as i i turned turned into into the the front front garden, garden, i i saw saw mr. mr. murdstone murdstone leaning leaning against against the the wicket wicket of of the the churchyard, churchyard, and and mr. mr. quinion quinion talking talking to to him. him. they they were were both both looking looking after after me, me, and and i i felt felt that that they they were were speaking speaking of of me. me. mr. mr. quinion quinion lay lay at at our our house house that that night. night. after after breakfast, breakfast, the the next next morning, morning, i i had had put put my my chair chair away, away, and and was was going going out out of of the the room, room, when when mr. mr. murdstone murdstone called called me me back. back. he he then then gravely gravely repaired repaired to to another another table, table, where where his his sister sister sat sat herself herself at at her her desk. desk. mr. mr. quinion, quinion, with with his his hands hands in in his his pockets, pockets, stood stood looking looking out out of of window; window; and and i i stood stood looking looking at at them them all. all. 'david,' 'david,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'to 'to the the young young this this is is a a world world for for action; action; not not for for moping moping and and droning droning in.' in.' -- -- 'as 'as you do,' do,' added added his his sister. sister. 'jane 'jane murdstone, murdstone, leave leave it it to to me, me, if if you please. please. i i say, say, david, david, to to the the young young this this is is a a world world for for action, action, and and not not for for moping moping and and droning droning in. in. it it is is especially especially so so for for a a young young boy boy of of your your disposition, disposition, which which requires requires a a great great deal deal of of correcting; correcting; and and to to which which no no greater greater service service can can be be done done than than to to force force it it to to conform conform to to the the ways ways of of the the working working world, world, and and to to bend bend it it and and break break it.' it.' 'for 'for stubbornness stubbornness won't won't do do here,' here,' said said his his sister sister 'what 'what it it wants wants is, is, to to be be crushed. crushed. and and crushed crushed it it must must be. be. shall shall be, be, too!' too!' he he gave gave her her a a look, look, half half in in remonstrance, remonstrance, half half in in approval, approval, and and went went on: on: 'i 'i suppose suppose you know, know, david, david, that that i i am am not not rich. rich. at at any any rate, rate, you know know it it now. now. you have have received received some some considerable considerable education education already. already. education education is is costly; costly; and and even even if if it it were were not, not, and and i i could could afford afford it, it, i i am am of of opinion opinion that that it it would would not not be be at at all all advantageous advantageous to to you to to be be kept kept at at school. school. what what is is before before you, is is a a fight fight with with the the world; world; and and the the sooner sooner you begin begin it, it, the the better.' better.' i i think think it it occurred occurred to to me me that that i i had had already already begun begun it, it, in in my my poor poor way: way: but but it it occurs occurs to to me me now, now, whether whether or or no. no. 'you have have heard heard the the "counting-house" "counting-house" mentioned mentioned sometimes,' sometimes,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'the 'the counting-house, counting-house, sir?' sir?' i i repeated. repeated. 'of 'of murdstone murdstone and and grinby, grinby, in in the the wine wine trade,' trade,' he he replied. replied. i i suppose suppose i i looked looked uncertain, uncertain, for for he he went went on on hastily: hastily: 'you have have heard heard the the "counting-house" "counting-house" mentioned, mentioned, or or the the business, business, or or the the cellars, cellars, or or the the wharf, wharf, or or something something about about it.' it.' 'i 'i think think i i have have heard heard the the business business mentioned, mentioned, sir,' sir,' i i said, said, remembering remembering what what i i vaguely vaguely knew knew of of his his and and his his sister's sister's resources. resources. 'but 'but i i don't don't know know when.' when.' 'it 'it does does not not matter matter when,' when,' he he returned. returned. 'mr. 'mr. quinion quinion manages manages that that business.' business.' i i glanced glanced at at the the latter latter deferentially deferentially as as he he stood stood looking looking out out of of window. window. 'mr. 'mr. quinion quinion suggests suggests that that it it gives gives employment employment to to some some other other boys, boys, and and that that he he sees sees no no reason reason why why it it shouldn't, shouldn't, on on the the same same terms, terms, give give employment employment to to you.' 'he 'he having,' having,' mr. mr. quinion quinion observed observed in in a a low low voice, voice, and and half half turning turning round, round, 'no 'no other other prospect, prospect, murdstone.' murdstone.' mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, with with an an impatient, impatient, even even an an angry angry gesture, gesture, resumed, resumed, without without noticing noticing what what he he had had said: said: 'those 'those terms terms are, are, that that you will will earn earn enough enough for for yourself yourself to to provide provide for for your your eating eating and and drinking, drinking, and and pocket-money. pocket-money. your your lodging lodging (which (which i i have have arranged arranged for) for) will will be be paid paid by by me. me. so so will will your your washing washing -- -- ' ' ' ' -- -- which which will will be be kept kept down down to to my my estimate,' estimate,' said said his his sister. sister. 'your 'your clothes clothes will will be be looked looked after after for for you, too,' too,' said said mr. mr. murdstone; murdstone; 'as 'as you will will not not be be able, able, yet yet awhile, awhile, to to get get them them for for yourself. yourself. so so you are are now now going going to to london, london, david, david, with with mr. mr. quinion, quinion, to to begin begin the the world world on on your your own own account.' account.' 'in 'in short, short, you are are provided provided for,' for,' observed observed his his sister; sister; 'and 'and will will please please to to do do your your duty.' duty.' though though i i quite quite understood understood that that the the purpose purpose of of this this announcement announcement was was to to get get rid rid of of me, me, i i have have no no distinct distinct remembrance remembrance whether whether it it pleased pleased or or frightened frightened me. me. my my impression impression is, is, that that i i was was in in a a state state of of confusion confusion about about it, it, and, and, oscillating oscillating between between the the two two points, points, touched touched neither. neither. nor nor had had i i much much time time for for the the clearing clearing of of my my thoughts, thoughts, as as mr. mr. quinion quinion was was to to go go upon upon the the morrow. morrow. behold behold me, me, on on the the morrow, morrow, in in a a much-worn much-worn little little white white hat, hat, with with a a black black crape crape round round it it for for my my mother, mother, a a black black jacket, jacket, and and a a pair pair of of hard, hard, stiff stiff corduroy corduroy trousers trousers -- -- which which miss miss murdstone murdstone considered considered the the best best armour armour for for the the legs legs in in that that fight fight with with the the world world which which was was now now to to come come off. off. behold behold me me so so attired, attired, and and with with my my little little worldly worldly all all before before me me in in a a small small trunk, trunk, sitting, sitting, a a lone lone lorn lorn child child (as (as mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge might might have have said), said), in in the the post-chaise post-chaise that that was was carrying carrying mr. mr. quinion quinion to to the the london london coach coach at at yarmouth! yarmouth! see, see, how how our our house house and and church church are are lessening lessening in in the the distance; distance; how how the the grave grave beneath beneath the the tree tree is is blotted blotted out out by by intervening intervening objects; objects; how how the the spire spire points points upwards upwards from from my my old old playground playground no no more, more, and and the the sky sky is is empty! empty! chapter chapter 11. 11. i i begin begin life life on on my my own own account, account, and and don't don't like like it it i i know know enough enough of of the the world world now, now, to to have have almost almost lost lost the the capacity capacity of of being being much much surprised surprised by by anything; anything; but but it it is is matter matter of of some some surprise surprise to to me, me, even even now, now, that that i i can can have have been been so so easily easily thrown thrown away away at at such such an an age. age. a a child child of of excellent excellent abilities, abilities, and and with with strong strong powers powers of of observation, observation, quick, quick, eager, eager, delicate, delicate, and and soon soon hurt hurt bodily bodily or or mentally, mentally, it it seems seems wonderful wonderful to to me me that that nobody nobody should should have have made made any any sign sign in in my my behalf. behalf. but but none none was was made; made; and and i i became, became, at at ten ten years years old, old, a a little little labouring labouring hind hind in in the the service service of of murdstone murdstone and and grinby. grinby. murdstone murdstone and and grinby's grinby's warehouse warehouse was was at at the the waterside. waterside. it it was was down down in in blackfriars. blackfriars. modern modern improvements improvements have have altered altered the the place; place; but but it it was was the the last last house house at at the the bottom bottom of of a a narrow narrow street, street, curving curving down down hill hill to to the the river, river, with with some some stairs stairs at at the the end, end, where where people people took took boat. boat. it it was was a a crazy crazy old old house house with with a a wharf wharf of of its its own, own, abutting abutting on on the the water water when when the the tide tide was was in, in, and and on on the the mud mud when when the the tide tide was was out, out, and and literally literally overrun overrun with with rats. rats. its its panelled panelled rooms, rooms, discoloured discoloured with with the the dirt dirt and and smoke smoke of of a a hundred hundred years, years, i i dare dare say; say; its its decaying decaying floors floors and and staircase; staircase; the the squeaking squeaking and and scuffling scuffling of of the the old old grey grey rats rats down down in in the the cellars; cellars; and and the the dirt dirt and and rottenness rottenness of of the the place; place; are are things, things, not not of of many many years years ago, ago, in in my my mind, mind, but but of of the the present present instant. instant. they they are are all all before before me, me, just just as as they they were were in in the the evil evil hour hour when when i i went went among among them them for for the the first first time, time, with with my my trembling trembling hand hand in in mr. mr. quinion's. quinion's. murdstone murdstone and and grinby's grinby's trade trade was was among among a a good good many many kinds kinds of of people, people, but but an an important important branch branch of of it it was was the the supply supply of of wines wines and and spirits spirits to to certain certain packet packet ships. ships. i i forget forget now now where where they they chiefly chiefly went, went, but but i i think think there there were were some some among among them them that that made made voyages voyages both both to to the the east east and and west west indies. indies. i i know know that that a a great great many many empty empty bottles bottles were were one one of of the the consequences consequences of of this this traffic, traffic, and and that that certain certain men men and and boys boys were were employed employed to to examine examine them them against against the the light, light, and and reject reject those those that that were were flawed, flawed, and and to to rinse rinse and and wash wash them. them. when when the the empty empty bottles bottles ran ran short, short, there there were were labels labels to to be be pasted pasted on on full full ones, ones, or or corks corks to to be be fitted fitted to to them, them, or or seals seals to to be be put put upon upon the the corks, corks, or or finished finished bottles bottles to to be be packed packed in in casks. casks. all all this this work work was was my my work, work, and and of of the the boys boys employed employed upon upon it it i i was was one. one. there there were were three three or or four four of of us, us, counting counting me. me. my my working working place place was was established established in in a a corner corner of of the the warehouse, warehouse, where where mr. mr. quinion quinion could could see see me, me, when when he he chose chose to to stand stand up up on on the the bottom bottom rail rail of of his his stool stool in in the the counting-house, counting-house, and and look look at at me me through through a a window window above above the the desk. desk. hither, hither, on on the the first first morning morning of of my my so so auspiciously auspiciously beginning beginning life life on on my my own own account, account, the the oldest oldest of of the the regular regular boys boys was was summoned summoned to to show show me me my my business. business. his his name name was was mick mick walker, walker, and and he he wore wore a a ragged ragged apron apron and and a a paper paper cap. cap. he he informed informed me me that that his his father father was was a a bargeman, bargeman, and and walked, walked, in in a a black black velvet velvet head-dress, head-dress, in in the the lord lord mayor's mayor's show. show. he he also also informed informed me me that that our our principal principal associate associate would would be be another another boy boy whom whom he he introduced introduced by by the the -- -- to to me me -- -- extraordinary extraordinary name name of of mealy mealy potatoes. potatoes. i i discovered, discovered, however, however, that that this this youth youth had had not not been been christened christened by by that that name, name, but but that that it it had had been been bestowed bestowed upon upon him him in in the the warehouse, warehouse, on on account account of of his his complexion, complexion, which which was was pale pale or or mealy. mealy. mealy's mealy's father father was was a a waterman, waterman, who who had had the the additional additional distinction distinction of of being being a a fireman, fireman, and and was was engaged engaged as as such such at at one one of of the the large large theatres; theatres; where where some some young young relation relation of of mealy's mealy's -- -- i i think think his his little little sister sister -- -- did did imps imps in in the the pantomimes. pantomimes. no no words words can can express express the the secret secret agony agony of of my my soul soul as as i i sunk sunk into into this this companionship; companionship; compared compared these these henceforth henceforth everyday everyday associates associates with with those those of of my my happier happier childhood childhood -- -- not not to to say say with with steerforth, steerforth, traddles, traddles, and and the the rest rest of of those those boys; boys; and and felt felt my my hopes hopes of of growing growing up up to to be be a a learned learned and and distinguished distinguished man, man, crushed crushed in in my my bosom. bosom. the the deep deep remembrance remembrance of of the the sense sense i i had, had, of of being being utterly utterly without without hope hope now; now; of of the the shame shame i i felt felt in in my my position; position; of of the the misery misery it it was was to to my my young young heart heart to to believe believe that that day day by by day day what what i i had had learned, learned, and and thought, thought, and and delighted delighted in, in, and and raised raised my my fancy fancy and and my my emulation emulation up up by, by, would would pass pass away away from from me, me, little little by by little, little, never never to to be be brought brought back back any any more; more; cannot cannot be be written. written. as as often often as as mick mick walker walker went went away away in in the the course course of of that that forenoon, forenoon, i i mingled mingled my my tears tears with with the the water water in in which which i i was was washing washing the the bottles; bottles; and and sobbed sobbed as as if if there there were were a a flaw flaw in in my my own own breast, breast, and and it it were were in in danger danger of of bursting. bursting. the the counting-house counting-house clock clock was was at at half half past past twelve, twelve, and and there there was was general general preparation preparation for for going going to to dinner, dinner, when when mr. mr. quinion quinion tapped tapped at at the the counting-house counting-house window, window, and and beckoned beckoned to to me me to to go go in. in. i i went went in, in, and and found found there there a a stoutish, stoutish, middle-aged middle-aged person, person, in in a a brown brown surtout surtout and and black black tights tights and and shoes, shoes, with with no no more more hair hair upon upon his his head head (which (which was was a a large large one, one, and and very very shining) shining) than than there there is is upon upon an an egg, egg, and and with with a a very very extensive extensive face, face, which which he he turned turned full full upon upon me. me. his his clothes clothes were were shabby, shabby, but but he he had had an an imposing imposing shirt-collar shirt-collar on. on. he he carried carried a a jaunty jaunty sort sort of of a a stick, stick, with with a a large large pair pair of of rusty rusty tassels tassels to to it; it; and and a a quizzing-glass quizzing-glass hung hung outside outside his his coat, coat, -- -- for for ornament, ornament, i i afterwards afterwards found, found, as as he he very very seldom seldom looked looked through through it, it, and and couldn't couldn't see see anything anything when when he he did. did. 'this,' 'this,' said said mr. mr. quinion, quinion, in in allusion allusion to to myself, myself, 'is 'is he.' he.' 'this,' 'this,' said said the the stranger, stranger, with with a a certain certain condescending condescending roll roll in in his his voice, voice, and and a a certain certain indescribable indescribable air air of of doing doing something something genteel, genteel, which which impressed impressed me me very very much, much, 'is 'is master master copperfield. copperfield. i i hope hope i i see see you well, well, sir?' sir?' i i said said i i was was very very well, well, and and hoped hoped he he was. was. i i was was sufficiently sufficiently ill ill at at ease, ease, heaven heaven knows; knows; but but it it was was not not in in my my nature nature to to complain complain much much at at that that time time of of my my life, life, so so i i said said i i was was very very well, well, and and hoped hoped he he was. was. 'i 'i am,' am,' said said the the stranger, stranger, 'thank 'thank heaven, heaven, quite quite well. well. i i have have received received a a letter letter from from mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, in in which which he he mentions mentions that that he he would would desire desire me me to to receive receive into into an an apartment apartment in in the the rear rear of of my my house, house, which which is is at at present present unoccupied unoccupied -- -- and and is, is, in in short, short, to to be be let let as as a a -- -- in in short,' short,' said said the the stranger, stranger, with with a a smile smile and and in in a a burst burst of of confidence, confidence, 'as 'as a a bedroom bedroom -- -- the the young young beginner beginner whom whom i i have have now now the the pleasure pleasure to to -- -- ' ' and and the the stranger stranger waved waved his his hand, hand, and and settled settled his his chin chin in in his his shirt-collar. shirt-collar. 'this 'this is is mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said mr. mr. quinion quinion to to me. me. 'ahem!' 'ahem!' said said the the stranger, stranger, 'that 'that is is my my name.' name.' 'mr. 'mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said mr. mr. quinion, quinion, 'is 'is known known to to mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. he he takes takes orders orders for for us us on on commission, commission, when when he he can can get get any. any. he he has has been been written written to to by by mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, on on the the subject subject of of your your lodgings, lodgings, and and he he will will receive receive you as as a a lodger.' lodger.' 'my 'my address,' address,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'is 'is windsor windsor terrace, terrace, city city road. road. i i -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with the the same same genteel genteel air, air, and and in in another another burst burst of of confidence confidence -- -- 'i 'i live live there.' there.' i i made made him him a a bow. bow. 'under 'under the the impression,' impression,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that your your peregrinations peregrinations in in this this metropolis metropolis have have not not as as yet yet been been extensive, extensive, and and that that you might might have have some some difficulty difficulty in in penetrating penetrating the the arcana arcana of of the the modern modern babylon babylon in in the the direction direction of of the the city city road, road, -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, in in another another burst burst of of confidence, confidence, 'that 'that you might might lose lose yourself yourself -- -- i i shall shall be be happy happy to to call call this this evening, evening, and and install install you in in the the knowledge knowledge of of the the nearest nearest way.' way.' i i thanked thanked him him with with all all my my heart, heart, for for it it was was friendly friendly in in him him to to offer offer to to take take that that trouble. trouble. 'at 'at what what hour,' hour,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'shall 'shall i i -- -- ' ' 'at 'at about about eight,' eight,' said said mr. mr. quinion. quinion. 'at 'at about about eight,' eight,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'i 'i beg beg to to wish wish you good good day, day, mr. mr. quinion. quinion. i i will will intrude intrude no no longer.' longer.' so so he he put put on on his his hat, hat, and and went went out out with with his his cane cane under under his his arm: arm: very very upright, upright, and and humming humming a a tune tune when when he he was was clear clear of of the the counting-house. counting-house. mr. mr. quinion quinion then then formally formally engaged engaged me me to to be be as as useful useful as as i i could could in in the the warehouse warehouse of of murdstone murdstone and and grinby, grinby, at at a a salary, salary, i i think, think, of of six six shillings shillings a a week. week. i i am am not not clear clear whether whether it it was was six six or or seven. seven. i i am am inclined inclined to to believe, believe, from from my my uncertainty uncertainty on on this this head, head, that that it it was was six six at at first first and and seven seven afterwards. afterwards. he he paid paid me me a a week week down down (from (from his his own own pocket, pocket, i i believe), believe), and and i i gave gave mealy mealy sixpence sixpence out out of of it it to to get get my my trunk trunk carried carried to to windsor windsor terrace terrace that that night: night: it it being being too too heavy heavy for for my my strength, strength, small small as as it it was. was. i i paid paid sixpence sixpence more more for for my my dinner, dinner, which which was was a a meat meat pie pie and and a a turn turn at at a a neighbouring neighbouring pump; pump; and and passed passed the the hour hour which which was was allowed allowed for for that that meal, meal, in in walking walking about about the the streets. streets. at at the the appointed appointed time time in in the the evening, evening, mr. mr. micawber micawber reappeared. reappeared. i i washed washed my my hands hands and and face, face, to to do do the the greater greater honour honour to to his his gentility, gentility, and and we we walked walked to to our our house, house, as as i i suppose suppose i i must must now now call call it, it, together; together; mr. mr. micawber micawber impressing impressing the the name name of of streets, streets, and and the the shapes shapes of of corner corner houses houses upon upon me, me, as as we we went went along, along, that that i i might might find find my my way way back, back, easily, easily, in in the the morning. morning. arrived arrived at at this this house house in in windsor windsor terrace terrace (which (which i i noticed noticed was was shabby shabby like like himself, himself, but but also, also, like like himself, himself, made made all all the the show show it it could), could), he he presented presented me me to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, a a thin thin and and faded faded lady, lady, not not at at all all young, young, who who was was sitting sitting in in the the parlour parlour (the (the first first floor floor was was altogether altogether unfurnished, unfurnished, and and the the blinds blinds were were kept kept down down to to delude delude the the neighbours), neighbours), with with a a baby baby at at her her breast. breast. this this baby baby was was one one of of twins; twins; and and i i may may remark remark here here that that i i hardly hardly ever, ever, in in all all my my experience experience of of the the family, family, saw saw both both the the twins twins detached detached from from mrs. mrs. micawber micawber at at the the same same time. time. one one of of them them was was always always taking taking refreshment. refreshment. there there were were two two other other children; children; master master micawber, micawber, aged aged about about four, four, and and miss miss micawber, micawber, aged aged about about three. three. these, these, and and a a dark-complexioned dark-complexioned young young woman, woman, with with a a habit habit of of snorting, snorting, who who was was servant servant to to the the family, family, and and informed informed me, me, before before half half an an hour hour had had expired, expired, that that she she was was 'a 'a orfling', orfling', and and came came from from st. st. luke's luke's workhouse, workhouse, in in the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, completed completed the the establishment. establishment. my my room room was was at at the the top top of of the the house, house, at at the the back: back: a a close close chamber; chamber; stencilled stencilled all all over over with with an an ornament ornament which which my my young young imagination imagination represented represented as as a a blue blue muffin; muffin; and and very very scantily scantily furnished. furnished. 'i 'i never never thought,' thought,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, when when she she came came up, up, twin twin and and all, all, to to show show me me the the apartment, apartment, and and sat sat down down to to take take breath, breath, 'before 'before i i was was married, married, when when i i lived lived with with papa papa and and mama, mama, that that i i should should ever ever find find it it necessary necessary to to take take a a lodger. lodger. but but mr. mr. micawber micawber being being in in difficulties, difficulties, all all considerations considerations of of private private feeling feeling must must give give way.' way.' i i said: said: 'yes, 'yes, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'mr. 'mr. micawber's micawber's difficulties difficulties are are almost almost overwhelming overwhelming just just at at present,' present,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber; micawber; 'and 'and whether whether it it is is possible possible to to bring bring him him through through them, them, i i don't don't know. know. when when i i lived lived at at home home with with papa papa and and mama, mama, i i really really should should have have hardly hardly understood understood what what the the word word meant, meant, in in the the sense sense in in which which i i now now employ employ it, it, but but experientia experientia does does it, it, -- -- as as papa papa used used to to say.' say.' i i cannot cannot satisfy satisfy myself myself whether whether she she told told me me that that mr. mr. micawber micawber had had been been an an officer officer in in the the marines, marines, or or whether whether i i have have imagined imagined it. it. i i only only know know that that i i believe believe to to this this hour hour that that he he was was in in the the marines marines once once upon upon a a time, time, without without knowing knowing why. why. he he was was a a sort sort of of town town traveller traveller for for a a number number of of miscellaneous miscellaneous houses, houses, now; now; but but made made little little or or nothing nothing of of it, it, i i am am afraid. afraid. 'if 'if mr. mr. micawber's micawber's creditors creditors will will not not give give him him time,' time,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'they 'they must must take take the the consequences; consequences; and and the the sooner sooner they they bring bring it it to to an an issue issue the the better. better. blood blood cannot cannot be be obtained obtained from from a a stone, stone, neither neither can can anything anything on on account account be be obtained obtained at at present present (not (not to to mention mention law law expenses) expenses) from from mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' i i never never can can quite quite understand understand whether whether my my precocious precocious self-dependence self-dependence confused confused mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in reference reference to to my my age, age, or or whether whether she she was was so so full full of of the the subject subject that that she she would would have have talked talked about about it it to to the the very very twins twins if if there there had had been been nobody nobody else else to to communicate communicate with, with, but but this this was was the the strain strain in in which which she she began, began, and and she she went went on on accordingly accordingly all all the the time time i i knew knew her. her. poor poor mrs. mrs. micawber! micawber! she she said said she she had had tried tried to to exert exert herself, herself, and and so, so, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, she she had. had. the the centre centre of of the the street street door door was was perfectly perfectly covered covered with with a a great great brass-plate, brass-plate, on on which which was was engraved engraved 'mrs. 'mrs. micawber's micawber's boarding boarding establishment establishment for for young young ladies': ladies': but but i i never never found found that that any any young young lady lady had had ever ever been been to to school school there; there; or or that that any any young young lady lady ever ever came, came, or or proposed proposed to to come; come; or or that that the the least least preparation preparation was was ever ever made made to to receive receive any any young young lady. lady. the the only only visitors visitors i i ever ever saw, saw, or or heard heard of, of, were were creditors. creditors. they they used used to to come come at at all all hours, hours, and and some some of of them them were were quite quite ferocious. ferocious. one one dirty-faced dirty-faced man, man, i i think think he he was was a a boot-maker, boot-maker, used used to to edge edge himself himself into into the the passage passage as as early early as as seven seven o'clock o'clock in in the the morning, morning, and and call call up up the the stairs stairs to to mr. mr. micawber micawber -- -- 'come! 'come! you ain't ain't out out yet, yet, you know. know. pay pay us, us, will will you? don't don't hide, hide, you know; know; that's that's mean. mean. i i wouldn't wouldn't be be mean mean if if i i was was you. pay pay us, us, will will you? you just just pay pay us, us, d'ye d'ye hear? hear? come!' come!' receiving receiving no no answer answer to to these these taunts, taunts, he he would would mount mount in in his his wrath wrath to to the the words words 'swindlers' 'swindlers' and and 'robbers'; 'robbers'; and and these these being being ineffectual ineffectual too, too, would would sometimes sometimes go go to to the the extremity extremity of of crossing crossing the the street, street, and and roaring roaring up up at at the the windows windows of of the the second second floor, floor, where where he he knew knew mr. mr. micawber micawber was. was. at at these these times, times, mr. mr. micawber micawber would would be be transported transported with with grief grief and and mortification, mortification, even even to to the the length length (as (as i i was was once once made made aware aware by by a a scream scream from from his his wife) wife) of of making making motions motions at at himself himself with with a a razor; razor; but but within within half-an-hour half-an-hour afterwards, afterwards, he he would would polish polish up up his his shoes shoes with with extraordinary extraordinary pains, pains, and and go go out, out, humming humming a a tune tune with with a a greater greater air air of of gentility gentility than than ever. ever. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was quite quite as as elastic. elastic. i i have have known known her her to to be be thrown thrown into into fainting fainting fits fits by by the the king's king's taxes taxes at at three three o'clock, o'clock, and and to to eat eat lamb lamb chops, chops, breaded, breaded, and and drink drink warm warm ale ale (paid (paid for for with with two two tea-spoons tea-spoons that that had had gone gone to to the the pawnbroker's) pawnbroker's) at at four. four. on on one one occasion, occasion, when when an an execution execution had had just just been been put put in, in, coming coming home home through through some some chance chance as as early early as as six six o'clock, o'clock, i i saw saw her her lying lying (of (of course course with with a a twin) twin) under under the the grate grate in in a a swoon, swoon, with with her her hair hair all all torn torn about about her her face; face; but but i i never never knew knew her her more more cheerful cheerful than than she she was, was, that that very very same same night, night, over over a a veal veal cutlet cutlet before before the the kitchen kitchen fire, fire, telling telling me me stories stories about about her her papa papa and and mama, mama, and and the the company company they they used used to to keep. keep. in in this this house, house, and and with with this this family, family, i i passed passed my my leisure leisure time. time. my my own own exclusive exclusive breakfast breakfast of of a a penny penny loaf loaf and and a a pennyworth pennyworth of of milk, milk, i i provided provided myself. myself. i i kept kept another another small small loaf, loaf, and and a a modicum modicum of of cheese, cheese, on on a a particular particular shelf shelf of of a a particular particular cupboard, cupboard, to to make make my my supper supper on on when when i i came came back back at at night. night. this this made made a a hole hole in in the the six six or or seven seven shillings, shillings, i i know know well; well; and and i i was was out out at at the the warehouse warehouse all all day, day, and and had had to to support support myself myself on on that that money money all all the the week. week. from from monday monday morning morning until until saturday saturday night, night, i i had had no no advice, advice, no no counsel, counsel, no no encouragement, encouragement, no no consolation, consolation, no no assistance, assistance, no no support, support, of of any any kind, kind, from from anyone, anyone, that that i i can can call call to to mind, mind, as as i i hope hope to to go go to to heaven! heaven! i i was was so so young young and and childish, childish, and and so so little little qualified qualified -- -- how how could could i i be be otherwise? otherwise? -- -- to to undertake undertake the the whole whole charge charge of of my my own own existence, existence, that that often, often, in in going going to to murdstone murdstone and and grinby's, grinby's, of of a a morning, morning, i i could could not not resist resist the the stale stale pastry pastry put put out out for for sale sale at at half-price half-price at at the the pastrycooks' pastrycooks' doors, doors, and and spent spent in in that that the the money money i i should should have have kept kept for for my my dinner. dinner. then, then, i i went went without without my my dinner, dinner, or or bought bought a a roll roll or or a a slice slice of of pudding. pudding. i i remember remember two two pudding pudding shops, shops, between between which which i i was was divided, divided, according according to to my my finances. finances. one one was was in in a a court court close close to to st. st. martin's martin's church church -- -- at at the the back back of of the the church, church, -- -- which which is is now now removed removed altogether. altogether. the the pudding pudding at at that that shop shop was was made made of of currants, currants, and and was was rather rather a a special special pudding, pudding, but but was was dear, dear, twopennyworth twopennyworth not not being being larger larger than than a a pennyworth pennyworth of of more more ordinary ordinary pudding. pudding. a a good good shop shop for for the the latter latter was was in in the the strand strand -- -- somewhere somewhere in in that that part part which which has has been been rebuilt rebuilt since. since. it it was was a a stout stout pale pale pudding, pudding, heavy heavy and and flabby, flabby, and and with with great great flat flat raisins raisins in in it, it, stuck stuck in in whole whole at at wide wide distances distances apart. apart. it it came came up up hot hot at at about about my my time time every every day, day, and and many many a a day day did did i i dine dine off off it. it. when when i i dined dined regularly regularly and and handsomely, handsomely, i i had had a a saveloy saveloy and and a a penny penny loaf, loaf, or or a a fourpenny fourpenny plate plate of of red red beef beef from from a a cook's cook's shop; shop; or or a a plate plate of of bread bread and and cheese cheese and and a a glass glass of of beer, beer, from from a a miserable miserable old old public-house public-house opposite opposite our our place place of of business, business, called called the the lion, lion, or or the the lion lion and and something something else else that that i i have have forgotten. forgotten. once, once, i i remember remember carrying carrying my my own own bread bread (which (which i i had had brought brought from from home home in in the the morning) morning) under under my my arm, arm, wrapped wrapped in in a a piece piece of of paper, paper, like like a a book, book, and and going going to to a a famous famous alamode alamode beef-house beef-house near near drury drury lane, lane, and and ordering ordering a a 'small 'small plate' plate' of of that that delicacy delicacy to to eat eat with with it. it. what what the the waiter waiter thought thought of of such such a a strange strange little little apparition apparition coming coming in in all all alone, alone, i i don't don't know; know; but but i i can can see see him him now, now, staring staring at at me me as as i i ate ate my my dinner, dinner, and and bringing bringing up up the the other other waiter waiter to to look. look. i i gave gave him him a a halfpenny halfpenny for for himself, himself, and and i i wish wish he he hadn't hadn't taken taken it. it. we we had had half-an-hour, half-an-hour, i i think, think, for for tea. tea. when when i i had had money money enough, enough, i i used used to to get get half-a-pint half-a-pint of of ready-made ready-made coffee coffee and and a a slice slice of of bread bread and and butter. butter. when when i i had had none, none, i i used used to to look look at at a a venison venison shop shop in in fleet fleet street; street; or or i i have have strolled, strolled, at at such such a a time, time, as as far far as as covent covent garden garden market, market, and and stared stared at at the the pineapples. pineapples. i i was was fond fond of of wandering wandering about about the the adelphi, adelphi, because because it it was was a a mysterious mysterious place, place, with with those those dark dark arches. arches. i i see see myself myself emerging emerging one one evening evening from from some some of of these these arches, arches, on on a a little little public-house public-house close close to to the the river, river, with with an an open open space space before before it, it, where where some some coal-heavers coal-heavers were were dancing; dancing; to to look look at at whom whom i i sat sat down down upon upon a a bench. bench. i i wonder wonder what what they they thought thought of of me! me! i i was was such such a a child, child, and and so so little, little, that that frequently frequently when when i i went went into into the the bar bar of of a a strange strange public-house public-house for for a a glass glass of of ale ale or or porter, porter, to to moisten moisten what what i i had had had had for for dinner, dinner, they they were were afraid afraid to to give give it it me. me. i i remember remember one one hot hot evening evening i i went went into into the the bar bar of of a a public-house, public-house, and and said said to to the the landlord: landlord: 'what 'what is is your your best best -- -- your your very very best best -- -- ale ale a a glass?' glass?' for for it it was was a a special special occasion. occasion. i i don't don't know know what. what. it it may may have have been been my my birthday. birthday. 'twopence-halfpenny,' 'twopence-halfpenny,' says says the the landlord, landlord, 'is 'is the the price price of of the the genuine genuine stunning stunning ale.' ale.' 'then,' 'then,' says says i, i, producing producing the the money, money, 'just 'just draw draw me me a a glass glass of of the the genuine genuine stunning, stunning, if if you please, please, with with a a good good head head to to it.' it.' the the landlord landlord looked looked at at me me in in return return over over the the bar, bar, from from head head to to foot, foot, with with a a strange strange smile smile on on his his face; face; and and instead instead of of drawing drawing the the beer, beer, looked looked round round the the screen screen and and said said something something to to his his wife. wife. she she came came out out from from behind behind it, it, with with her her work work in in her her hand, hand, and and joined joined him him in in surveying surveying me. me. here here we we stand, stand, all all three, three, before before me me now. now. the the landlord landlord in in his his shirt-sleeves, shirt-sleeves, leaning leaning against against the the bar bar window-frame; window-frame; his his wife wife looking looking over over the the little little half-door; half-door; and and i, i, in in some some confusion, confusion, looking looking up up at at them them from from outside outside the the partition. partition. they they asked asked me me a a good good many many questions; questions; as, as, what what my my name name was, was, how how old old i i was, was, where where i i lived, lived, how how i i was was employed, employed, and and how how i i came came there. there. to to all all of of which, which, that that i i might might commit commit nobody, nobody, i i invented, invented, i i am am afraid, afraid, appropriate appropriate answers. answers. they they served served me me with with the the ale, ale, though though i i suspect suspect it it was was not not the the genuine genuine stunning; stunning; and and the the landlord's landlord's wife, wife, opening opening the the little little half-door half-door of of the the bar, bar, and and bending bending down, down, gave gave me me my my money money back, back, and and gave gave me me a a kiss kiss that that was was half half admiring admiring and and half half compassionate, compassionate, but but all all womanly womanly and and good, good, i i am am sure. sure. i i know know i i do do not not exaggerate, exaggerate, unconsciously unconsciously and and unintentionally, unintentionally, the the scantiness scantiness of of my my resources resources or or the the difficulties difficulties of of my my life. life. i i know know that that if if a a shilling shilling were were given given me me by by mr. mr. quinion quinion at at any any time, time, i i spent spent it it in in a a dinner dinner or or a a tea. tea. i i know know that that i i worked, worked, from from morning morning until until night, night, with with common common men men and and boys, boys, a a shabby shabby child. child. i i know know that that i i lounged lounged about about the the streets, streets, insufficiently insufficiently and and unsatisfactorily unsatisfactorily fed. fed. i i know know that, that, but but for for the the mercy mercy of of god, god, i i might might easily easily have have been, been, for for any any care care that that was was taken taken of of me, me, a a little little robber robber or or a a little little vagabond. vagabond. yet yet i i held held some some station station at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's grinby's too. too. besides besides that that mr. mr. quinion quinion did did what what a a careless careless man man so so occupied, occupied, and and dealing dealing with with a a thing thing so so anomalous, anomalous, could, could, to to treat treat me me as as one one upon upon a a different different footing footing from from the the rest, rest, i i never never said, said, to to man man or or boy, boy, how how it it was was that that i i came came to to be be there, there, or or gave gave the the least least indication indication of of being being sorry sorry that that i i was was there. there. that that i i suffered suffered in in secret, secret, and and that that i i suffered suffered exquisitely, exquisitely, no no one one ever ever knew knew but but i. i. how how much much i i suffered, suffered, it it is, is, as as i i have have said said already, already, utterly utterly beyond beyond my my power power to to tell. tell. but but i i kept kept my my own own counsel, counsel, and and i i did did my my work. work. i i knew knew from from the the first, first, that, that, if if i i could could not not do do my my work work as as well well as as any any of of the the rest, rest, i i could could not not hold hold myself myself above above slight slight and and contempt. contempt. i i soon soon became became at at least least as as expeditious expeditious and and as as skilful skilful as as either either of of the the other other boys. boys. though though perfectly perfectly familiar familiar with with them, them, my my conduct conduct and and manner manner were were different different enough enough from from theirs theirs to to place place a a space space between between us. us. they they and and the the men men generally generally spoke spoke of of me me as as 'the 'the little little gent', gent', or or 'the 'the young young suffolker.' suffolker.' a a certain certain man man named named gregory, gregory, who who was was foreman foreman of of the the packers, packers, and and another another named named tipp, tipp, who who was was the the carman, carman, and and wore wore a a red red jacket, jacket, used used to to address address me me sometimes sometimes as as 'david': 'david': but but i i think think it it was was mostly mostly when when we we were were very very confidential, confidential, and and when when i i had had made made some some efforts efforts to to entertain entertain them, them, over over our our work, work, with with some some results results of of the the old old readings; readings; which which were were fast fast perishing perishing out out of of my my remembrance. remembrance. mealy mealy potatoes potatoes uprose uprose once, once, and and rebelled rebelled against against my my being being so so distinguished; distinguished; but but mick mick walker walker settled settled him him in in no no time. time. my my rescue rescue from from this this kind kind of of existence existence i i considered considered quite quite hopeless, hopeless, and and abandoned, abandoned, as as such, such, altogether. altogether. i i am am solemnly solemnly convinced convinced that that i i never never for for one one hour hour was was reconciled reconciled to to it, it, or or was was otherwise otherwise than than miserably miserably unhappy; unhappy; but but i i bore bore it; it; and and even even to to peggotty, peggotty, partly partly for for the the love love of of her her and and partly partly for for shame, shame, never never in in any any letter letter (though (though many many passed passed between between us) us) revealed revealed the the truth. truth. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's difficulties difficulties were were an an addition addition to to the the distressed distressed state state of of my my mind. mind. in in my my forlorn forlorn state state i i became became quite quite attached attached to to the the family, family, and and used used to to walk walk about, about, busy busy with with mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's calculations calculations of of ways ways and and means, means, and and heavy heavy with with the the weight weight of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's debts. debts. on on a a saturday saturday night, night, which which was was my my grand grand treat, treat, -- -- partly partly because because it it was was a a great great thing thing to to walk walk home home with with six six or or seven seven shillings shillings in in my my pocket, pocket, looking looking into into the the shops shops and and thinking thinking what what such such a a sum sum would would buy, buy, and and partly partly because because i i went went home home early, early, -- -- mrs. mrs. micawber micawber would would make make the the most most heart-rending heart-rending confidences confidences to to me; me; also also on on a a sunday sunday morning, morning, when when i i mixed mixed the the portion portion of of tea tea or or coffee coffee i i had had bought bought over-night, over-night, in in a a little little shaving-pot, shaving-pot, and and sat sat late late at at my my breakfast. breakfast. it it was was nothing nothing at at all all unusual unusual for for mr. mr. micawber micawber to to sob sob violently violently at at the the beginning beginning of of one one of of these these saturday saturday night night conversations, conversations, and and sing sing about about jack's jack's delight delight being being his his lovely lovely nan, nan, towards towards the the end end of of it. it. i i have have known known him him come come home home to to supper supper with with a a flood flood of of tears, tears, and and a a declaration declaration that that nothing nothing was was now now left left but but a a jail; jail; and and go go to to bed bed making making a a calculation calculation of of the the expense expense of of putting putting bow-windows bow-windows to to the the house, house, 'in 'in case case anything anything turned turned up', up', which which was was his his favourite favourite expression. expression. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was just just the the same. same. a a curious curious equality equality of of friendship, friendship, originating, originating, i i suppose, suppose, in in our our respective respective circumstances, circumstances, sprung sprung up up between between me me and and these these people, people, notwithstanding notwithstanding the the ludicrous ludicrous disparity disparity in in our our years. years. but but i i never never allowed allowed myself myself to to be be prevailed prevailed upon upon to to accept accept any any invitation invitation to to eat eat and and drink drink with with them them out out of of their their stock stock (knowing (knowing that that they they got got on on badly badly with with the the butcher butcher and and baker, baker, and and had had often often not not too too much much for for themselves), themselves), until until mrs. mrs. micawber micawber took took me me into into her her entire entire confidence. confidence. this this she she did did one one evening evening as as follows: follows: 'master 'master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i make make no no stranger stranger of of you, and and therefore therefore do do not not hesitate hesitate to to say say that that mr. mr. micawber's micawber's difficulties difficulties are are coming coming to to a a crisis.' crisis.' it it made made me me very very miserable miserable to to hear hear it, it, and and i i looked looked at at mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's red red eyes eyes with with the the utmost utmost sympathy. sympathy. 'with 'with the the exception exception of of the the heel heel of of a a dutch dutch cheese cheese -- -- which which is is not not adapted adapted to to the the wants wants of of a a young young family' family' -- -- said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'there 'there is is really really not not a a scrap scrap of of anything anything in in the the larder. larder. i i was was accustomed accustomed to to speak speak of of the the larder larder when when i i lived lived with with papa papa and and mama, mama, and and i i use use the the word word almost almost unconsciously. unconsciously. what what i i mean mean to to express express is, is, that that there there is is nothing nothing to to eat eat in in the the house.' house.' 'dear 'dear me!' me!' i i said, said, in in great great concern. concern. i i had had two two or or three three shillings shillings of of my my week's week's money money in in my my pocket pocket -- -- from from which which i i presume presume that that it it must must have have been been on on a a wednesday wednesday night night when when we we held held this this conversation conversation -- -- and and i i hastily hastily produced produced them, them, and and with with heartfelt heartfelt emotion emotion begged begged mrs. mrs. micawber micawber to to accept accept of of them them as as a a loan. loan. but but that that lady, lady, kissing kissing me, me, and and making making me me put put them them back back in in my my pocket, pocket, replied replied that that she she couldn't couldn't think think of of it. it. 'no, 'no, my my dear dear master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said she, she, 'far 'far be be it it from from my my thoughts! thoughts! but but you have have a a discretion discretion beyond beyond your your years, years, and and can can render render me me another another kind kind of of service, service, if if you will; will; and and a a service service i i will will thankfully thankfully accept accept of.' of.' i i begged begged mrs. mrs. micawber micawber to to name name it. it. 'i 'i have have parted parted with with the the plate plate myself,' myself,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'six 'six tea, tea, two two salt, salt, and and a a pair pair of of sugars, sugars, i i have have at at different different times times borrowed borrowed money money on, on, in in secret, secret, with with my my own own hands. hands. but but the the twins twins are are a a great great tie; tie; and and to to me, me, with with my my recollections, recollections, of of papa papa and and mama, mama, these these transactions transactions are are very very painful. painful. there there are are still still a a few few trifles trifles that that we we could could part part with. with. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's feelings feelings would would never never allow allow him him to to dispose dispose of of them; them; and and clickett' clickett' -- -- this this was was the the girl girl from from the the workhouse workhouse -- -- 'being 'being of of a a vulgar vulgar mind, mind, would would take take painful painful liberties liberties if if so so much much confidence confidence was was reposed reposed in in her. her. master master copperfield, copperfield, if if i i might might ask ask you -- -- ' ' i i understood understood mrs. mrs. micawber micawber now, now, and and begged begged her her to to make make use use of of me me to to any any extent. extent. i i began began to to dispose dispose of of the the more more portable portable articles articles of of property property that that very very evening; evening; and and went went out out on on a a similar similar expedition expedition almost almost every every morning, morning, before before i i went went to to murdstone murdstone and and grinby's. grinby's. mr. mr. micawber micawber had had a a few few books books on on a a little little chiffonier, chiffonier, which which he he called called the the library; library; and and those those went went first. first. i i carried carried them, them, one one after after another, another, to to a a bookstall bookstall in in the the city city road road -- -- one one part part of of which, which, near near our our house, house, was was almost almost all all bookstalls bookstalls and and bird bird shops shops then then -- -- and and sold sold them them for for whatever whatever they they would would bring. bring. the the keeper keeper of of this this bookstall, bookstall, who who lived lived in in a a little little house house behind behind it, it, used used to to get get tipsy tipsy every every night, night, and and to to be be violently violently scolded scolded by by his his wife wife every every morning. morning. more more than than once, once, when when i i went went there there early, early, i i had had audience audience of of him him in in a a turn-up turn-up bedstead, bedstead, with with a a cut cut in in his his forehead forehead or or a a black black eye, eye, bearing bearing witness witness to to his his excesses excesses over-night over-night (i (i am am afraid afraid he he was was quarrelsome quarrelsome in in his his drink), drink), and and he, he, with with a a shaking shaking hand, hand, endeavouring endeavouring to to find find the the needful needful shillings shillings in in one one or or other other of of the the pockets pockets of of his his clothes, clothes, which which lay lay upon upon the the floor, floor, while while his his wife, wife, with with a a baby baby in in her her arms arms and and her her shoes shoes down down at at heel, heel, never never left left off off rating rating him. him. sometimes sometimes he he had had lost lost his his money, money, and and then then he he would would ask ask me me to to call call again; again; but but his his wife wife had had always always got got some some -- -- had had taken taken his, his, i i dare dare say, say, while while he he was was drunk drunk -- -- and and secretly secretly completed completed the the bargain bargain on on the the stairs, stairs, as as we we went went down down together. together. at at the the pawnbroker's pawnbroker's shop, shop, too, too, i i began began to to be be very very well well known. known. the the principal principal gentleman gentleman who who officiated officiated behind behind the the counter, counter, took took a a good good deal deal of of notice notice of of me; me; and and often often got got me, me, i i recollect, recollect, to to decline decline a a latin latin noun noun or or adjective, adjective, or or to to conjugate conjugate a a latin latin verb, verb, in in his his ear, ear, while while he he transacted transacted my my business. business. after after all all these these occasions occasions mrs. mrs. micawber micawber made made a a little little treat, treat, which which was was generally generally a a supper; supper; and and there there was was a a peculiar peculiar relish relish in in these these meals meals which which i i well well remember. remember. at at last last mr. mr. micawber's micawber's difficulties difficulties came came to to a a crisis, crisis, and and he he was was arrested arrested early early one one morning, morning, and and carried carried over over to to the the king's king's bench bench prison prison in in the the borough. borough. he he told told me, me, as as he he went went out out of of the the house, house, that that the the god god of of day day had had now now gone gone down down upon upon him him -- -- and and i i really really thought thought his his heart heart was was broken broken and and mine mine too. too. but but i i heard, heard, afterwards, afterwards, that that he he was was seen seen to to play play a a lively lively game game at at skittles, skittles, before before noon. noon. on on the the first first sunday sunday after after he he was was taken taken there, there, i i was was to to go go and and see see him, him, and and have have dinner dinner with with him. him. i i was was to to ask ask my my way way to to such such a a place, place, and and just just short short of of that that place place i i should should see see such such another another place, place, and and just just short short of of that that i i should should see see a a yard, yard, which which i i was was to to cross, cross, and and keep keep straight straight on on until until i i saw saw a a turnkey. turnkey. all all this this i i did; did; and and when when at at last last i i did did see see a a turnkey turnkey (poor (poor little little fellow fellow that that i i was!), was!), and and thought thought how, how, when when roderick roderick random random was was in in a a debtors' debtors' prison, prison, there there was was a a man man there there with with nothing nothing on on him him but but an an old old rug, rug, the the turnkey turnkey swam swam before before my my dimmed dimmed eyes eyes and and my my beating beating heart. heart. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was waiting waiting for for me me within within the the gate, gate, and and we we went went up up to to his his room room (top (top story story but but one), one), and and cried cried very very much. much. he he solemnly solemnly conjured conjured me, me, i i remember, remember, to to take take warning warning by by his his fate; fate; and and to to observe observe that that if if a a man man had had twenty twenty pounds pounds a-year a-year for for his his income, income, and and spent spent nineteen nineteen pounds pounds nineteen nineteen shillings shillings and and sixpence, sixpence, he he would would be be happy, happy, but but that that if if he he spent spent twenty twenty pounds pounds one one he he would would be be miserable. miserable. after after which which he he borrowed borrowed a a shilling shilling of of me me for for porter, porter, gave gave me me a a written written order order on on mrs. mrs. micawber micawber for for the the amount, amount, and and put put away away his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and cheered cheered up. up. we we sat sat before before a a little little fire, fire, with with two two bricks bricks put put within within the the rusted rusted grate, grate, one one on on each each side, side, to to prevent prevent its its burning burning too too many many coals; coals; until until another another debtor, debtor, who who shared shared the the room room with with mr. mr. micawber, micawber, came came in in from from the the bakehouse bakehouse with with the the loin loin of of mutton mutton which which was was our our joint-stock joint-stock repast. repast. then then i i was was sent sent up up to to 'captain 'captain hopkins' hopkins' in in the the room room overhead, overhead, with with mr. mr. micawber's micawber's compliments, compliments, and and i i was was his his young young friend, friend, and and would would captain captain hopkins hopkins lend lend me me a a knife knife and and fork. fork. captain captain hopkins hopkins lent lent me me the the knife knife and and fork, fork, with with his his compliments compliments to to mr. mr. micawber. micawber. there there was was a a very very dirty dirty lady lady in in his his little little room, room, and and two two wan wan girls, girls, his his daughters, daughters, with with shock shock heads heads of of hair. hair. i i thought thought it it was was better better to to borrow borrow captain captain hopkins's hopkins's knife knife and and fork, fork, than than captain captain hopkins's hopkins's comb. comb. the the captain captain himself himself was was in in the the last last extremity extremity of of shabbiness, shabbiness, with with large large whiskers, whiskers, and and an an old, old, old old brown brown great-coat great-coat with with no no other other coat coat below below it. it. i i saw saw his his bed bed rolled rolled up up in in a a corner; corner; and and what what plates plates and and dishes dishes and and pots pots he he had, had, on on a a shelf; shelf; and and i i divined divined (god (god knows knows how) how) that that though though the the two two girls girls with with the the shock shock heads heads of of hair hair were were captain captain hopkins's hopkins's children, children, the the dirty dirty lady lady was was not not married married to to captain captain hopkins. hopkins. my my timid timid station station on on his his threshold threshold was was not not occupied occupied more more than than a a couple couple of of minutes minutes at at most; most; but but i i came came down down again again with with all all this this in in my my knowledge, knowledge, as as surely surely as as the the knife knife and and fork fork were were in in my my hand. hand. there there was was something something gipsy-like gipsy-like and and agreeable agreeable in in the the dinner, dinner, after after all. all. i i took took back back captain captain hopkins's hopkins's knife knife and and fork fork early early in in the the afternoon, afternoon, and and went went home home to to comfort comfort mrs. mrs. micawber micawber with with an an account account of of my my visit. visit. she she fainted fainted when when she she saw saw me me return, return, and and made made a a little little jug jug of of egg-hot egg-hot afterwards afterwards to to console console us us while while we we talked talked it it over. over. i i don't don't know know how how the the household household furniture furniture came came to to be be sold sold for for the the family family benefit, benefit, or or who who sold sold it, it, except except that that i i did did not. not. sold sold it it was, was, however, however, and and carried carried away away in in a a van; van; except except the the bed, bed, a a few few chairs, chairs, and and the the kitchen kitchen table. table. with with these these possessions possessions we we encamped, encamped, as as it it were, were, in in the the two two parlours parlours of of the the emptied emptied house house in in windsor windsor terrace; terrace; mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, the the children, children, the the orfling, orfling, and and myself; myself; and and lived lived in in those those rooms rooms night night and and day. day. i i have have no no idea idea for for how how long, long, though though it it seems seems to to me me for for a a long long time. time. at at last last mrs. mrs. micawber micawber resolved resolved to to move move into into the the prison, prison, where where mr. mr. micawber micawber had had now now secured secured a a room room to to himself. himself. so so i i took took the the key key of of the the house house to to the the landlord, landlord, who who was was very very glad glad to to get get it; it; and and the the beds beds were were sent sent over over to to the the king's king's bench, bench, except except mine, mine, for for which which a a little little room room was was hired hired outside outside the the walls walls in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood of of that that institution, institution, very very much much to to my my satisfaction, satisfaction, since since the the micawbers micawbers and and i i had had become become too too used used to to one one another, another, in in our our troubles, troubles, to to part. part. the the orfling orfling was was likewise likewise accommodated accommodated with with an an inexpensive inexpensive lodging lodging in in the the same same neighbourhood. neighbourhood. mine mine was was a a quiet quiet back-garret back-garret with with a a sloping sloping roof, roof, commanding commanding a a pleasant pleasant prospect prospect of of a a timberyard; timberyard; and and when when i i took took possession possession of of it, it, with with the the reflection reflection that that mr. mr. micawber's micawber's troubles troubles had had come come to to a a crisis crisis at at last, last, i i thought thought it it quite quite a a paradise. paradise. all all this this time time i i was was working working at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's grinby's in in the the same same common common way, way, and and with with the the same same common common companions, companions, and and with with the the same same sense sense of of unmerited unmerited degradation degradation as as at at first. first. but but i i never, never, happily happily for for me me no no doubt, doubt, made made a a single single acquaintance, acquaintance, or or spoke spoke to to any any of of the the many many boys boys whom whom i i saw saw daily daily in in going going to to the the warehouse, warehouse, in in coming coming from from it, it, and and in in prowling prowling about about the the streets streets at at meal-times. meal-times. i i led led the the same same secretly secretly unhappy unhappy life; life; but but i i led led it it in in the the same same lonely, lonely, self-reliant self-reliant manner. manner. the the only only changes changes i i am am conscious conscious of of are, are, firstly, firstly, that that i i had had grown grown more more shabby, shabby, and and secondly, secondly, that that i i was was now now relieved relieved of of much much of of the the weight weight of of mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's cares; cares; for for some some relatives relatives or or friends friends had had engaged engaged to to help help them them at at their their present present pass, pass, and and they they lived lived more more comfortably comfortably in in the the prison prison than than they they had had lived lived for for a a long long while while out out of of it. it. i i used used to to breakfast breakfast with with them them now, now, in in virtue virtue of of some some arrangement, arrangement, of of which which i i have have forgotten forgotten the the details. details. i i forget, forget, too, too, at at what what hour hour the the gates gates were were opened opened in in the the morning, morning, admitting admitting of of my my going going in; in; but but i i know know that that i i was was often often up up at at six six o'clock, o'clock, and and that that my my favourite favourite lounging-place lounging-place in in the the interval interval was was old old london london bridge, bridge, where where i i was was wont wont to to sit sit in in one one of of the the stone stone recesses, recesses, watching watching the the people people going going by, by, or or to to look look over over the the balustrades balustrades at at the the sun sun shining shining in in the the water, water, and and lighting lighting up up the the golden golden flame flame on on the the top top of of the the monument. monument. the the orfling orfling met met me me here here sometimes, sometimes, to to be be told told some some astonishing astonishing fictions fictions respecting respecting the the wharves wharves and and the the tower; tower; of of which which i i can can say say no no more more than than that that i i hope hope i i believed believed them them myself. myself. in in the the evening evening i i used used to to go go back back to to the the prison, prison, and and walk walk up up and and down down the the parade parade with with mr. mr. micawber; micawber; or or play play casino casino with with mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and hear hear reminiscences reminiscences of of her her papa papa and and mama. mama. whether whether mr. mr. murdstone murdstone knew knew where where i i was, was, i i am am unable unable to to say. say. i i never never told told them them at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's. grinby's. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's affairs, affairs, although although past past their their crisis, crisis, were were very very much much involved involved by by reason reason of of a a certain certain 'deed', 'deed', of of which which i i used used to to hear hear a a great great deal, deal, and and which which i i suppose, suppose, now, now, to to have have been been some some former former composition composition with with his his creditors, creditors, though though i i was was so so far far from from being being clear clear about about it it then, then, that that i i am am conscious conscious of of having having confounded confounded it it with with those those demoniacal demoniacal parchments parchments which which are are held held to to have, have, once once upon upon a a time, time, obtained obtained to to a a great great extent extent in in germany. germany. at at last last this this document document appeared appeared to to be be got got out out of of the the way, way, somehow; somehow; at at all all events events it it ceased ceased to to be be the the rock-ahead rock-ahead it it had had been; been; and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber informed informed me me that that 'her 'her family' family' had had decided decided that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should apply apply for for his his release release under under the the insolvent insolvent debtors debtors act, act, which which would would set set him him free, free, she she expected, expected, in in about about six six weeks. weeks. 'and 'and then,' then,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who was was present, present, 'i 'i have have no no doubt doubt i i shall, shall, please please heaven, heaven, begin begin to to be be beforehand beforehand with with the the world, world, and and to to live live in in a a perfectly perfectly new new manner, manner, if if -- -- in in short, short, if if anything anything turns turns up.' up.' by by way way of of going going in in for for anything anything that that might might be be on on the the cards, cards, i i call call to to mind mind that that mr. mr. micawber, micawber, about about this this time, time, composed composed a a petition petition to to the the house house of of commons, commons, praying praying for for an an alteration alteration in in the the law law of of imprisonment imprisonment for for debt. debt. i i set set down down this this remembrance remembrance here, here, because because it it is is an an instance instance to to myself myself of of the the manner manner in in which which i i fitted fitted my my old old books books to to my my altered altered life, life, and and made made stories stories for for myself, myself, out out of of the the streets, streets, and and out out of of men men and and women; women; and and how how some some main main points points in in the the character character i i shall shall unconsciously unconsciously develop, develop, i i suppose, suppose, in in writing writing my my life, life, were were gradually gradually forming forming all all this this while. while. there there was was a a club club in in the the prison, prison, in in which which mr. mr. micawber, micawber, as as a a gentleman, gentleman, was was a a great great authority. authority. mr. mr. micawber micawber had had stated stated his his idea idea of of this this petition petition to to the the club, club, and and the the club club had had strongly strongly approved approved of of the the same. same. wherefore wherefore mr. mr. micawber micawber (who (who was was a a thoroughly thoroughly good-natured good-natured man, man, and and as as active active a a creature creature about about everything everything but but his his own own affairs affairs as as ever ever existed, existed, and and never never so so happy happy as as when when he he was was busy busy about about something something that that could could never never be be of of any any profit profit to to him) him) set set to to work work at at the the petition, petition, invented invented it, it, engrossed engrossed it it on on an an immense immense sheet sheet of of paper, paper, spread spread it it out out on on a a table, table, and and appointed appointed a a time time for for all all the the club, club, and and all all within within the the walls walls if if they they chose, chose, to to come come up up to to his his room room and and sign sign it. it. when when i i heard heard of of this this approaching approaching ceremony, ceremony, i i was was so so anxious anxious to to see see them them all all come come in, in, one one after after another, another, though though i i knew knew the the greater greater part part of of them them already, already, and and they they me, me, that that i i got got an an hour's hour's leave leave of of absence absence from from murdstone murdstone and and grinby's, grinby's, and and established established myself myself in in a a corner corner for for that that purpose. purpose. as as many many of of the the principal principal members members of of the the club club as as could could be be got got into into the the small small room room without without filling filling it, it, supported supported mr. mr. micawber micawber in in front front of of the the petition, petition, while while my my old old friend friend captain captain hopkins hopkins (who (who had had washed washed himself, himself, to to do do honour honour to to so so solemn solemn an an occasion) occasion) stationed stationed himself himself close close to to it, it, to to read read it it to to all all who who were were unacquainted unacquainted with with its its contents. contents. the the door door was was then then thrown thrown open, open, and and the the general general population population began began to to come come in, in, in in a a long long file: file: several several waiting waiting outside, outside, while while one one entered, entered, affixed affixed his his signature, signature, and and went went out. out. to to everybody everybody in in succession, succession, captain captain hopkins hopkins said: said: 'have 'have you read read it?' it?' -- -- 'no.' 'no.' -- -- -'would -'would you like like to to hear hear it it read?' read?' if if he he weakly weakly showed showed the the least least disposition disposition to to hear hear it, it, captain captain hopkins, hopkins, in in a a loud loud sonorous sonorous voice, voice, gave gave him him every every word word of of it. it. the the captain captain would would have have read read it it twenty twenty thousand thousand times, times, if if twenty twenty thousand thousand people people would would have have heard heard him, him, one one by by one. one. i i remember remember a a certain certain luscious luscious roll roll he he gave gave to to such such phrases phrases as as 'the 'the people's people's representatives representatives in in parliament parliament assembled,' assembled,' 'your 'your petitioners petitioners therefore therefore humbly humbly approach approach your your honourable honourable house,' house,' 'his 'his gracious gracious majesty's majesty's unfortunate unfortunate subjects,' subjects,' as as if if the the words words were were something something real real in in his his mouth, mouth, and and delicious delicious to to taste; taste; mr. mr. micawber, micawber, meanwhile, meanwhile, listening listening with with a a little little of of an an author's author's vanity, vanity, and and contemplating contemplating (not (not severely) severely) the the spikes spikes on on the the opposite opposite wall. wall. as as i i walked walked to to and and fro fro daily daily between between southwark southwark and and blackfriars, blackfriars, and and lounged lounged about about at at meal-times meal-times in in obscure obscure streets, streets, the the stones stones of of which which may, may, for for anything anything i i know, know, be be worn worn at at this this moment moment by by my my childish childish feet, feet, i i wonder wonder how how many many of of these these people people were were wanting wanting in in the the crowd crowd that that used used to to come come filing filing before before me me in in review review again, again, to to the the echo echo of of captain captain hopkins's hopkins's voice! voice! when when my my thoughts thoughts go go back, back, now, now, to to that that slow slow agony agony of of my my youth, youth, i i wonder wonder how how much much of of the the histories histories i i invented invented for for such such people people hangs hangs like like a a mist mist of of fancy fancy over over well-remembered well-remembered facts! facts! when when i i tread tread the the old old ground, ground, i i do do not not wonder wonder that that i i seem seem to to see see and and pity, pity, going going on on before before me, me, an an innocent innocent romantic romantic boy, boy, making making his his imaginative imaginative world world out out of of such such strange strange experiences experiences and and sordid sordid things! things! chapter chapter 12. 12. liking liking life life on on my my own own account account no no better, better, i i form form a a great great resolution resolution in in due due time, time, mr. mr. micawber's micawber's petition petition was was ripe ripe for for hearing; hearing; and and that that gentleman gentleman was was ordered ordered to to be be discharged discharged under under the the act, act, to to my my great great joy. joy. his his creditors creditors were were not not implacable; implacable; and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber informed informed me me that that even even the the revengeful revengeful boot-maker boot-maker had had declared declared in in open open court court that that he he bore bore him him no no malice, malice, but but that that when when money money was was owing owing to to him him he he liked liked to to be be paid. paid. he he said said he he thought thought it it was was human human nature. nature. mr. mr. micawber micawber returned returned to to the the king's king's bench bench when when his his case case was was over, over, as as some some fees fees were were to to be be settled, settled, and and some some formalities formalities observed, observed, before before he he could could be be actually actually released. released. the the club club received received him him with with transport, transport, and and held held an an harmonic harmonic meeting meeting that that evening evening in in his his honour; honour; while while mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and i i had had a a lamb's lamb's fry fry in in private, private, surrounded surrounded by by the the sleeping sleeping family. family. 'on 'on such such an an occasion occasion i i will will give give you, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'in 'in a a little little more more flip,' flip,' for for we we had had been been having having some some already, already, 'the 'the memory memory of of my my papa papa and and mama.' mama.' 'are 'are they they dead, dead, ma'am?' ma'am?' i i inquired, inquired, after after drinking drinking the the toast toast in in a a wine-glass. wine-glass. 'my 'my mama mama departed departed this this life,' life,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'before 'before mr. mr. micawber's micawber's difficulties difficulties commenced, commenced, or or at at least least before before they they became became pressing. pressing. my my papa papa lived lived to to bail bail mr. mr. micawber micawber several several times, times, and and then then expired, expired, regretted regretted by by a a numerous numerous circle.' circle.' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber shook shook her her head, head, and and dropped dropped a a pious pious tear tear upon upon the the twin twin who who happened happened to to be be in in hand. hand. as as i i could could hardly hardly hope hope for for a a more more favourable favourable opportunity opportunity of of putting putting a a question question in in which which i i had had a a near near interest, interest, i i said said to to mrs. mrs. micawber: micawber: 'may 'may i i ask, ask, ma'am, ma'am, what what you and and mr. mr. micawber micawber intend intend to to do, do, now now that that mr. mr. micawber micawber is is out out of of his his difficulties, difficulties, and and at at liberty? liberty? have have you settled settled yet?' yet?' 'my 'my family,' family,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, who who always always said said those those two two words words with with an an air, air, though though i i never never could could discover discover who who came came under under the the denomination, denomination, 'my 'my family family are are of of opinion opinion that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should quit quit london, london, and and exert exert his his talents talents in in the the country. country. mr. mr. micawber micawber is is a a man man of of great great talent, talent, master master copperfield.' copperfield.' i i said said i i was was sure sure of of that. that. 'of 'of great great talent,' talent,' repeated repeated mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'my 'my family family are are of of opinion, opinion, that, that, with with a a little little interest, interest, something something might might be be done done for for a a man man of of his his ability ability in in the the custom custom house. house. the the influence influence of of my my family family being being local, local, it it is is their their wish wish that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should go go down down to to plymouth. plymouth. they they think think it it indispensable indispensable that that he he should should be be upon upon the the spot.' spot.' 'that 'that he he may may be be ready?' ready?' i i suggested. suggested. 'exactly,' 'exactly,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'that 'that he he may may be be ready ready -- -- in in case case of of anything anything turning turning up.' up.' 'and 'and do do you go go too, too, ma'am?' ma'am?' the the events events of of the the day, day, in in combination combination with with the the twins, twins, if if not not with with the the flip, flip, had had made made mrs. mrs. micawber micawber hysterical, hysterical, and and she she shed shed tears tears as as she she replied: replied: 'i 'i never never will will desert desert mr. mr. micawber. micawber. mr. mr. micawber micawber may may have have concealed concealed his his difficulties difficulties from from me me in in the the first first instance, instance, but but his his sanguine sanguine temper temper may may have have led led him him to to expect expect that that he he would would overcome overcome them. them. the the pearl pearl necklace necklace and and bracelets bracelets which which i i inherited inherited from from mama, mama, have have been been disposed disposed of of for for less less than than half half their their value; value; and and the the set set of of coral, coral, which which was was the the wedding wedding gift gift of of my my papa, papa, has has been been actually actually thrown thrown away away for for nothing. nothing. but but i i never never will will desert desert mr. mr. micawber. micawber. no!' no!' cried cried mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, more more affected affected than than before, before, 'i 'i never never will will do do it! it! it's it's of of no no use use asking asking me!' me!' i i felt felt quite quite uncomfortable uncomfortable -- -- as as if if mrs. mrs. micawber micawber supposed supposed i i had had asked asked her her to to do do anything anything of of the the sort! sort! -- -- and and sat sat looking looking at at her her in in alarm. alarm. 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber has has his his faults. faults. i i do do not not deny deny that that he he is is improvident. improvident. i i do do not not deny deny that that he he has has kept kept me me in in the the dark dark as as to to his his resources resources and and his his liabilities liabilities both,' both,' she she went went on, on, looking looking at at the the wall; wall; 'but 'but i i never never will will desert desert mr. mr. micawber!' micawber!' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber having having now now raised raised her her voice voice into into a a perfect perfect scream, scream, i i was was so so frightened frightened that that i i ran ran off off to to the the club-room, club-room, and and disturbed disturbed mr. mr. micawber micawber in in the the act act of of presiding presiding at at a a long long table, table, and and leading leading the the chorus chorus of of gee gee up, up, dobbin, dobbin, gee gee ho, ho, dobbin, dobbin, gee gee up, up, dobbin, dobbin, gee gee up, up, and and gee gee ho ho -- -- o o -- -- o! o! with with the the tidings tidings that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was in in an an alarming alarming state, state, upon upon which which he he immediately immediately burst burst into into tears, tears, and and came came away away with with me me with with his his waistcoat waistcoat full full of of the the heads heads and and tails tails of of shrimps, shrimps, of of which which he he had had been been partaking. partaking. 'emma, 'emma, my my angel!' angel!' cried cried mr. mr. micawber, micawber, running running into into the the room; room; 'what 'what is is the the matter?' matter?' 'i 'i never never will will desert desert you, micawber!' micawber!' she she exclaimed. exclaimed. 'my 'my life!' life!' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, taking taking her her in in his his arms. arms. 'i 'i am am perfectly perfectly aware aware of of it.' it.' 'he 'he is is the the parent parent of of my my children! children! he he is is the the father father of of my my twins! twins! he he is is the the husband husband of of my my affections,' affections,' cried cried mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, struggling; struggling; 'and 'and i i ne ne -- -- ver ver -- -- will will -- -- desert desert mr. mr. micawber!' micawber!' mr. mr. micawber micawber was was so so deeply deeply affected affected by by this this proof proof of of her her devotion devotion (as (as to to me, me, i i was was dissolved dissolved in in tears), tears), that that he he hung hung over over her her in in a a passionate passionate manner, manner, imploring imploring her her to to look look up, up, and and to to be be calm. calm. but but the the more more he he asked asked mrs. mrs. micawber micawber to to look look up, up, the the more more she she fixed fixed her her eyes eyes on on nothing; nothing; and and the the more more he he asked asked her her to to compose compose herself, herself, the the more more she she wouldn't. wouldn't. consequently consequently mr. mr. micawber micawber was was soon soon so so overcome, overcome, that that he he mingled mingled his his tears tears with with hers hers and and mine; mine; until until he he begged begged me me to to do do him him the the favour favour of of taking taking a a chair chair on on the the staircase, staircase, while while he he got got her her into into bed. bed. i i would would have have taken taken my my leave leave for for the the night, night, but but he he would would not not hear hear of of my my doing doing that that until until the the strangers' strangers' bell bell should should ring. ring. so so i i sat sat at at the the staircase staircase window, window, until until he he came came out out with with another another chair chair and and joined joined me. me. 'how 'how is is mrs. mrs. micawber micawber now, now, sir?' sir?' i i said. said. 'very 'very low,' low,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, shaking shaking his his head; head; 'reaction. 'reaction. ah, ah, this this has has been been a a dreadful dreadful day! day! we we stand stand alone alone now now -- -- everything everything is is gone gone from from us!' us!' mr. mr. micawber micawber pressed pressed my my hand, hand, and and groaned, groaned, and and afterwards afterwards shed shed tears. tears. i i was was greatly greatly touched, touched, and and disappointed disappointed too, too, for for i i had had expected expected that that we we should should be be quite quite gay gay on on this this happy happy and and long-looked-for long-looked-for occasion. occasion. but but mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber were were so so used used to to their their old old difficulties, difficulties, i i think, think, that that they they felt felt quite quite shipwrecked shipwrecked when when they they came came to to consider consider that that they they were were released released from from them. them. all all their their elasticity elasticity was was departed, departed, and and i i never never saw saw them them half half so so wretched wretched as as on on this this night; night; insomuch insomuch that that when when the the bell bell rang, rang, and and mr. mr. micawber micawber walked walked with with me me to to the the lodge, lodge, and and parted parted from from me me there there with with a a blessing, blessing, i i felt felt quite quite afraid afraid to to leave leave him him by by himself, himself, he he was was so so profoundly profoundly miserable. miserable. but but through through all all the the confusion confusion and and lowness lowness of of spirits spirits in in which which we we had had been, been, so so unexpectedly unexpectedly to to me, me, involved, involved, i i plainly plainly discerned discerned that that mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and their their family family were were going going away away from from london, london, and and that that a a parting parting between between us us was was near near at at hand. hand. it it was was in in my my walk walk home home that that night, night, and and in in the the sleepless sleepless hours hours which which followed followed when when i i lay lay in in bed, bed, that that the the thought thought first first occurred occurred to to me me -- -- though though i i don't don't know know how how it it came came into into my my head head -- -- which which afterwards afterwards shaped shaped itself itself into into a a settled settled resolution. resolution. i i had had grown grown to to be be so so accustomed accustomed to to the the micawbers, micawbers, and and had had been been so so intimate intimate with with them them in in their their distresses, distresses, and and was was so so utterly utterly friendless friendless without without them, them, that that the the prospect prospect of of being being thrown thrown upon upon some some new new shift shift for for a a lodging, lodging, and and going going once once more more among among unknown unknown people, people, was was like like being being that that moment moment turned turned adrift adrift into into my my present present life, life, with with such such a a knowledge knowledge of of it it ready ready made made as as experience experience had had given given me. me. all all the the sensitive sensitive feelings feelings it it wounded wounded so so cruelly, cruelly, all all the the shame shame and and misery misery it it kept kept alive alive within within my my breast, breast, became became more more poignant poignant as as i i thought thought of of this; this; and and i i determined determined that that the the life life was was unendurable. unendurable. that that there there was was no no hope hope of of escape escape from from it, it, unless unless the the escape escape was was my my own own act, act, i i knew knew quite quite well. well. i i rarely rarely heard heard from from miss miss murdstone, murdstone, and and never never from from mr. mr. murdstone: murdstone: but but two two or or three three parcels parcels of of made made or or mended mended clothes clothes had had come come up up for for me, me, consigned consigned to to mr. mr. quinion, quinion, and and in in each each there there was was a a scrap scrap of of paper paper to to the the effect effect that that j. j. m. m. trusted trusted d. d. c. c. was was applying applying himself himself to to business, business, and and devoting devoting himself himself wholly wholly to to his his duties duties -- -- not not the the least least hint hint of of my my ever ever being being anything anything else else than than the the common common drudge drudge into into which which i i was was fast fast settling settling down. down. the the very very next next day day showed showed me, me, while while my my mind mind was was in in the the first first agitation agitation of of what what it it had had conceived, conceived, that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had not not spoken spoken of of their their going going away away without without warrant. warrant. they they took took a a lodging lodging in in the the house house where where i i lived, lived, for for a a week; week; at at the the expiration expiration of of which which time time they they were were to to start start for for plymouth. plymouth. mr. mr. micawber micawber himself himself came came down down to to the the counting-house, counting-house, in in the the afternoon, afternoon, to to tell tell mr. mr. quinion quinion that that he he must must relinquish relinquish me me on on the the day day of of his his departure, departure, and and to to give give me me a a high high character, character, which which i i am am sure sure i i deserved. deserved. and and mr. mr. quinion, quinion, calling calling in in tipp tipp the the carman, carman, who who was was a a married married man, man, and and had had a a room room to to let, let, quartered quartered me me prospectively prospectively on on him him -- -- by by our our mutual mutual consent, consent, as as he he had had every every reason reason to to think; think; for for i i said said nothing, nothing, though though my my resolution resolution was was now now taken. taken. i i passed passed my my evenings evenings with with mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, during during the the remaining remaining term term of of our our residence residence under under the the same same roof; roof; and and i i think think we we became became fonder fonder of of one one another another as as the the time time went went on. on. on on the the last last sunday, sunday, they they invited invited me me to to dinner; dinner; and and we we had had a a loin loin of of pork pork and and apple apple sauce, sauce, and and a a pudding. pudding. i i had had bought bought a a spotted spotted wooden wooden horse horse over-night over-night as as a a parting parting gift gift to to little little wilkins wilkins micawber micawber -- -- that that was was the the boy boy -- -- and and a a doll doll for for little little emma. emma. i i had had also also bestowed bestowed a a shilling shilling on on the the orfling, orfling, who who was was about about to to be be disbanded. disbanded. we we had had a a very very pleasant pleasant day, day, though though we we were were all all in in a a tender tender state state about about our our approaching approaching separation. separation. 'i 'i shall shall never, never, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'revert 'revert to to the the period period when when mr. mr. micawber micawber was was in in difficulties, difficulties, without without thinking thinking of of you. your your conduct conduct has has always always been been of of the the most most delicate delicate and and obliging obliging description. description. you have have never never been been a a lodger. lodger. you have have been been a a friend.' friend.' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber; micawber; 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' for for so so he he had had been been accustomed accustomed to to call call me, me, of of late, late, 'has 'has a a heart heart to to feel feel for for the the distresses distresses of of his his fellow-creatures fellow-creatures when when they they are are behind behind a a cloud, cloud, and and a a head head to to plan, plan, and and a a hand hand to to -- -- in in short, short, a a general general ability ability to to dispose dispose of of such such available available property property as as could could be be made made away away with.' with.' i i expressed expressed my my sense sense of of this this commendation, commendation, and and said said i i was was very very sorry sorry we we were were going going to to lose lose one one another. another. 'my 'my dear dear young young friend,' friend,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i am am older older than than you; a a man man of of some some experience experience in in life, life, and and -- -- and and of of some some experience, experience, in in short, short, in in difficulties, difficulties, generally generally speaking. speaking. at at present, present, and and until until something something turns turns up up (which (which i i am, am, i i may may say, say, hourly hourly expecting), expecting), i i have have nothing nothing to to bestow bestow but but advice. advice. still still my my advice advice is is so so far far worth worth taking, taking, that that -- -- in in short, short, that that i i have have never never taken taken it it myself, myself, and and am am the' the' -- -- here here mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who had had been been beaming beaming and and smiling, smiling, all all over over his his head head and and face, face, up up to to the the present present moment, moment, checked checked himself himself and and frowned frowned -- -- 'the 'the miserable miserable wretch wretch you behold.' behold.' 'my 'my dear dear micawber!' micawber!' urged urged his his wife. wife. 'i 'i say,' say,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, quite quite forgetting forgetting himself, himself, and and smiling smiling again, again, 'the 'the miserable miserable wretch wretch you behold. behold. my my advice advice is, is, never never do do tomorrow tomorrow what what you can can do do today. today. procrastination procrastination is is the the thief thief of of time. time. collar collar him!' him!' 'my 'my poor poor papa's papa's maxim,' maxim,' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber observed. observed. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'your 'your papa papa was was very very well well in in his his way, way, and and heaven heaven forbid forbid that that i i should should disparage disparage him. him. take take him him for for all all in in all, all, we we ne'er ne'er shall shall -- -- in in short, short, make make the the acquaintance, acquaintance, probably, probably, of of anybody anybody else else possessing, possessing, at at his his time time of of life, life, the the same same legs legs for for gaiters, gaiters, and and able able to to read read the the same same description description of of print, print, without without spectacles. spectacles. but but he he applied applied that that maxim maxim to to our our marriage, marriage, my my dear; dear; and and that that was was so so far far prematurely prematurely entered entered into, into, in in consequence, consequence, that that i i never never recovered recovered the the expense.' expense.' mr. mr. micawber micawber looked looked aside aside at at mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and added: added: 'not 'not that that i i am am sorry sorry for for it. it. quite quite the the contrary, contrary, my my love.' love.' after after which, which, he he was was grave grave for for a a minute minute or or so. so. 'my 'my other other piece piece of of advice, advice, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'you know. know. annual annual income income twenty twenty pounds, pounds, annual annual expenditure expenditure nineteen nineteen nineteen nineteen and and six, six, result result happiness. happiness. annual annual income income twenty twenty pounds, pounds, annual annual expenditure expenditure twenty twenty pounds pounds ought ought and and six, six, result result misery. misery. the the blossom blossom is is blighted, blighted, the the leaf leaf is is withered, withered, the the god god of of day day goes goes down down upon upon the the dreary dreary scene, scene, and and -- -- and and in in short short you are are for for ever ever floored. floored. as as i i am!' am!' to to make make his his example example the the more more impressive, impressive, mr. mr. micawber micawber drank drank a a glass glass of of punch punch with with an an air air of of great great enjoyment enjoyment and and satisfaction, satisfaction, and and whistled whistled the the college college hornpipe. hornpipe. i i did did not not fail fail to to assure assure him him that that i i would would store store these these precepts precepts in in my my mind, mind, though though indeed indeed i i had had no no need need to to do do so, so, for, for, at at the the time, time, they they affected affected me me visibly. visibly. next next morning morning i i met met the the whole whole family family at at the the coach coach office, office, and and saw saw them, them, with with a a desolate desolate heart, heart, take take their their places places outside, outside, at at the the back. back. 'master 'master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'god 'god bless bless you! i i never never can can forget forget all all that, that, you know, know, and and i i never never would would if if i i could.' could.' 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'farewell! 'farewell! every every happiness happiness and and prosperity! prosperity! if, if, in in the the progress progress of of revolving revolving years, years, i i could could persuade persuade myself myself that that my my blighted blighted destiny destiny had had been been a a warning warning to to you, i i should should feel feel that that i i had had not not occupied occupied another another man's man's place place in in existence existence altogether altogether in in vain. vain. in in case case of of anything anything turning turning up up (of (of which which i i am am rather rather confident), confident), i i shall shall be be extremely extremely happy happy if if it it should should be be in in my my power power to to improve improve your your prospects.' prospects.' i i think, think, as as mrs. mrs. micawber micawber sat sat at at the the back back of of the the coach, coach, with with the the children, children, and and i i stood stood in in the the road road looking looking wistfully wistfully at at them, them, a a mist mist cleared cleared from from her her eyes, eyes, and and she she saw saw what what a a little little creature creature i i really really was. was. i i think think so, so, because because she she beckoned beckoned to to me me to to climb climb up, up, with with quite quite a a new new and and motherly motherly expression expression in in her her face, face, and and put put her her arm arm round round my my neck, neck, and and gave gave me me just just such such a a kiss kiss as as she she might might have have given given to to her her own own boy. boy. i i had had barely barely time time to to get get down down again again before before the the coach coach started, started, and and i i could could hardly hardly see see the the family family for for the the handkerchiefs handkerchiefs they they waved. waved. it it was was gone gone in in a a minute. minute. the the orfling orfling and and i i stood stood looking looking vacantly vacantly at at each each other other in in the the middle middle of of the the road, road, and and then then shook shook hands hands and and said said good-bye; good-bye; she she going going back, back, i i suppose, suppose, to to st. st. luke's luke's workhouse, workhouse, as as i i went went to to begin begin my my weary weary day day at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's. grinby's. but but with with no no intention intention of of passing passing many many more more weary weary days days there. there. no. no. i i had had resolved resolved to to run run away. away. -- -- -to -to go, go, by by some some means means or or other, other, down down into into the the country, country, to to the the only only relation relation i i had had in in the the world, world, and and tell tell my my story story to to my my aunt, aunt, miss miss betsey. betsey. i i have have already already observed observed that that i i don't don't know know how how this this desperate desperate idea idea came came into into my my brain. brain. but, but, once once there, there, it it remained remained there; there; and and hardened hardened into into a a purpose purpose than than which which i i have have never never entertained entertained a a more more determined determined purpose purpose in in my my life. life. i i am am far far from from sure sure that that i i believed believed there there was was anything anything hopeful hopeful in in it, it, but but my my mind mind was was thoroughly thoroughly made made up up that that it it must must be be carried carried into into execution. execution. again, again, and and again, again, and and a a hundred hundred times times again, again, since since the the night night when when the the thought thought had had first first occurred occurred to to me me and and banished banished sleep, sleep, i i had had gone gone over over that that old old story story of of my my poor poor mother's mother's about about my my birth, birth, which which it it had had been been one one of of my my great great delights delights in in the the old old time time to to hear hear her her tell, tell, and and which which i i knew knew by by heart. heart. my my aunt aunt walked walked into into that that story, story, and and walked walked out out of of it, it, a a dread dread and and awful awful personage; personage; but but there there was was one one little little trait trait in in her her behaviour behaviour which which i i liked liked to to dwell dwell on, on, and and which which gave gave me me some some faint faint shadow shadow of of encouragement. encouragement. i i could could not not forget forget how how my my mother mother had had thought thought that that she she felt felt her her touch touch her her pretty pretty hair hair with with no no ungentle ungentle hand; hand; and and though though it it might might have have been been altogether altogether my my mother's mother's fancy, fancy, and and might might have have had had no no foundation foundation whatever whatever in in fact, fact, i i made made a a little little picture, picture, out out of of it, it, of of my my terrible terrible aunt aunt relenting relenting towards towards the the girlish girlish beauty beauty that that i i recollected recollected so so well well and and loved loved so so much, much, which which softened softened the the whole whole narrative. narrative. it it is is very very possible possible that that it it had had been been in in my my mind mind a a long long time, time, and and had had gradually gradually engendered engendered my my determination. determination. as as i i did did not not even even know know where where miss miss betsey betsey lived, lived, i i wrote wrote a a long long letter letter to to peggotty, peggotty, and and asked asked her, her, incidentally, incidentally, if if she she remembered; remembered; pretending pretending that that i i had had heard heard of of such such a a lady lady living living at at a a certain certain place place i i named named at at random, random, and and had had a a curiosity curiosity to to know know if if it it were were the the same. same. in in the the course course of of that that letter, letter, i i told told peggotty peggotty that that i i had had a a particular particular occasion occasion for for half half a a guinea; guinea; and and that that if if she she could could lend lend me me that that sum sum until until i i could could repay repay it, it, i i should should be be very very much much obliged obliged to to her, her, and and would would tell tell her her afterwards afterwards what what i i had had wanted wanted it it for. for. peggotty's peggotty's answer answer soon soon arrived, arrived, and and was, was, as as usual, usual, full full of of affectionate affectionate devotion. devotion. she she enclosed enclosed the the half half guinea guinea (i (i was was afraid afraid she she must must have have had had a a world world of of trouble trouble to to get get it it out out of of mr. mr. barkis's barkis's box), box), and and told told me me that that miss miss betsey betsey lived lived near near dover, dover, but but whether whether at at dover dover itself, itself, at at hythe, hythe, sandgate, sandgate, or or folkestone, folkestone, she she could could not not say. say. one one of of our our men, men, however, however, informing informing me me on on my my asking asking him him about about these these places, places, that that they they were were all all close close together, together, i i deemed deemed this this enough enough for for my my object, object, and and resolved resolved to to set set out out at at the the end end of of that that week. week. being being a a very very honest honest little little creature, creature, and and unwilling unwilling to to disgrace disgrace the the memory memory i i was was going going to to leave leave behind behind me me at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's, grinby's, i i considered considered myself myself bound bound to to remain remain until until saturday saturday night; night; and, and, as as i i had had been been paid paid a a week's week's wages wages in in advance advance when when i i first first came came there, there, not not to to present present myself myself in in the the counting-house counting-house at at the the usual usual hour, hour, to to receive receive my my stipend. stipend. for for this this express express reason, reason, i i had had borrowed borrowed the the half-guinea, half-guinea, that that i i might might not not be be without without a a fund fund for for my my travelling-expenses. travelling-expenses. accordingly, accordingly, when when the the saturday saturday night night came, came, and and we we were were all all waiting waiting in in the the warehouse warehouse to to be be paid, paid, and and tipp tipp the the carman, carman, who who always always took took precedence, precedence, went went in in first first to to draw draw his his money, money, i i shook shook mick mick walker walker by by the the hand; hand; asked asked him, him, when when it it came came to to his his turn turn to to be be paid, paid, to to say say to to mr. mr. quinion quinion that that i i had had gone gone to to move move my my box box to to tipp's; tipp's; and, and, bidding bidding a a last last good good night night to to mealy mealy potatoes, potatoes, ran ran away. away. my my box box was was at at my my old old lodging, lodging, over over the the water, water, and and i i had had written written a a direction direction for for it it on on the the back back of of one one of of our our address address cards cards that that we we nailed nailed on on the the casks: casks: 'master 'master david, david, to to be be left left till till called called for, for, at at the the coach coach office, office, dover.' dover.' this this i i had had in in my my pocket pocket ready ready to to put put on on the the box, box, after after i i should should have have got got it it out out of of the the house; house; and and as as i i went went towards towards my my lodging, lodging, i i looked looked about about me me for for someone someone who who would would help help me me to to carry carry it it to to the the booking-office. booking-office. there there was was a a long-legged long-legged young young man man with with a a very very little little empty empty donkey-cart, donkey-cart, standing standing near near the the obelisk, obelisk, in in the the blackfriars blackfriars road, road, whose whose eye eye i i caught caught as as i i was was going going by, by, and and who, who, addressing addressing me me as as 'sixpenn'orth 'sixpenn'orth of of bad bad ha'pence,' ha'pence,' hoped hoped 'i 'i should should know know him him agin agin to to swear swear to' to' -- -- in in allusion, allusion, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, to to my my staring staring at at him. him. i i stopped stopped to to assure assure him him that that i i had had not not done done so so in in bad bad manners, manners, but but uncertain uncertain whether whether he he might might or or might might not not like like a a job. job. 'wot 'wot job?' job?' said said the the long-legged long-legged young young man. man. 'to 'to move move a a box,' box,' i i answered. answered. 'wot 'wot box?' box?' said said the the long-legged long-legged young young man. man. i i told told him him mine, mine, which which was was down down that that street street there, there, and and which which i i wanted wanted him him to to take take to to the the dover dover coach coach office office for for sixpence. sixpence. 'done 'done with with you for for a a tanner!' tanner!' said said the the long-legged long-legged young young man, man, and and directly directly got got upon upon his his cart, cart, which which was was nothing nothing but but a a large large wooden wooden tray tray on on wheels, wheels, and and rattled rattled away away at at such such a a rate, rate, that that it it was was as as much much as as i i could could do do to to keep keep pace pace with with the the donkey. donkey. there there was was a a defiant defiant manner manner about about this this young young man, man, and and particularly particularly about about the the way way in in which which he he chewed chewed straw straw as as he he spoke spoke to to me, me, that that i i did did not not much much like; like; as as the the bargain bargain was was made, made, however, however, i i took took him him upstairs upstairs to to the the room room i i was was leaving, leaving, and and we we brought brought the the box box down, down, and and put put it it on on his his cart. cart. now, now, i i was was unwilling unwilling to to put put the the direction-card direction-card on on there, there, lest lest any any of of my my landlord's landlord's family family should should fathom fathom what what i i was was doing, doing, and and detain detain me; me; so so i i said said to to the the young young man man that that i i would would be be glad glad if if he he would would stop stop for for a a minute, minute, when when he he came came to to the the dead-wall dead-wall of of the the king's king's bench bench prison. prison. the the words words were were no no sooner sooner out out of of my my mouth, mouth, than than he he rattled rattled away away as as if if he, he, my my box, box, the the cart, cart, and and the the donkey, donkey, were were all all equally equally mad; mad; and and i i was was quite quite out out of of breath breath with with running running and and calling calling after after him, him, when when i i caught caught him him at at the the place place appointed. appointed. being being much much flushed flushed and and excited, excited, i i tumbled tumbled my my half-guinea half-guinea out out of of my my pocket pocket in in pulling pulling the the card card out. out. i i put put it it in in my my mouth mouth for for safety, safety, and and though though my my hands hands trembled trembled a a good good deal, deal, had had just just tied tied the the card card on on very very much much to to my my satisfaction, satisfaction, when when i i felt felt myself myself violently violently chucked chucked under under the the chin chin by by the the long-legged long-legged young young man, man, and and saw saw my my half-guinea half-guinea fly fly out out of of my my mouth mouth into into his his hand. hand. 'wot!' 'wot!' said said the the young young man, man, seizing seizing me me by by my my jacket jacket collar, collar, with with a a frightful frightful grin. grin. 'this 'this is is a a pollis pollis case, case, is is it? it? you're you're a-going a-going to to bolt, bolt, are are you? come come to to the the pollis, pollis, you young young warmin, warmin, come come to to the the pollis!' pollis!' 'you give give me me my my money money back, back, if if you please,' please,' said said i, i, very very much much frightened; frightened; 'and 'and leave leave me me alone.' alone.' 'come 'come to to the the pollis!' pollis!' said said the the young young man. man. 'you shall shall prove prove it it yourn yourn to to the the pollis.' pollis.' 'give 'give me me my my box box and and money, money, will will you,' i i cried, cried, bursting bursting into into tears. tears. the the young young man man still still replied: replied: 'come 'come to to the the pollis!' pollis!' and and was was dragging dragging me me against against the the donkey donkey in in a a violent violent manner, manner, as as if if there there were were any any affinity affinity between between that that animal animal and and a a magistrate, magistrate, when when he he changed changed his his mind, mind, jumped jumped into into the the cart, cart, sat sat upon upon my my box, box, and, and, exclaiming exclaiming that that he he would would drive drive to to the the pollis pollis straight, straight, rattled rattled away away harder harder than than ever. ever. i i ran ran after after him him as as fast fast as as i i could, could, but but i i had had no no breath breath to to call call out out with, with, and and should should not not have have dared dared to to call call out, out, now, now, if if i i had. had. i i narrowly narrowly escaped escaped being being run run over, over, twenty twenty times times at at least, least, in in half half a a mile. mile. now now i i lost lost him, him, now now i i saw saw him, him, now now i i lost lost him, him, now now i i was was cut cut at at with with a a whip, whip, now now shouted shouted at, at, now now down down in in the the mud, mud, now now up up again, again, now now running running into into somebody's somebody's arms, arms, now now running running headlong headlong at at a a post. post. at at length, length, confused confused by by fright fright and and heat, heat, and and doubting doubting whether whether half half london london might might not not by by this this time time be be turning turning out out for for my my apprehension, apprehension, i i left left the the young young man man to to go go where where he he would would with with my my box box and and money; money; and, and, panting panting and and crying, crying, but but never never stopping, stopping, faced faced about about for for greenwich, greenwich, which which i i had had understood understood was was on on the the dover dover road: road: taking taking very very little little more more out out of of the the world, world, towards towards the the retreat retreat of of my my aunt, aunt, miss miss betsey, betsey, than than i i had had brought brought into into it, it, on on the the night night when when my my arrival arrival gave gave her her so so much much umbrage. umbrage. chapter chapter 13. 13. the the sequel sequel of of my my resolution resolution for for anything anything i i know, know, i i may may have have had had some some wild wild idea idea of of running running all all the the way way to to dover, dover, when when i i gave gave up up the the pursuit pursuit of of the the young young man man with with the the donkey-cart, donkey-cart, and and started started for for greenwich. greenwich. my my scattered scattered senses senses were were soon soon collected collected as as to to that that point, point, if if i i had; had; for for i i came came to to a a stop stop in in the the kent kent road, road, at at a a terrace terrace with with a a piece piece of of water water before before it, it, and and a a great great foolish foolish image image in in the the middle, middle, blowing blowing a a dry dry shell. shell. here here i i sat sat down down on on a a doorstep, doorstep, quite quite spent spent and and exhausted exhausted with with the the efforts efforts i i had had already already made, made, and and with with hardly hardly breath breath enough enough to to cry cry for for the the loss loss of of my my box box and and half-guinea. half-guinea. it it was was by by this this time time dark; dark; i i heard heard the the clocks clocks strike strike ten, ten, as as i i sat sat resting. resting. but but it it was was a a summer summer night, night, fortunately, fortunately, and and fine fine weather. weather. when when i i had had recovered recovered my my breath, breath, and and had had got got rid rid of of a a stifling stifling sensation sensation in in my my throat, throat, i i rose rose up up and and went went on. on. in in the the midst midst of of my my distress, distress, i i had had no no notion notion of of going going back. back. i i doubt doubt if if i i should should have have had had any, any, though though there there had had been been a a swiss swiss snow-drift snow-drift in in the the kent kent road. road. but but my my standing standing possessed possessed of of only only three-halfpence three-halfpence in in the the world world (and (and i i am am sure sure i i wonder wonder how how they they came came to to be be left left in in my my pocket pocket on on a a saturday saturday night!) night!) troubled troubled me me none none the the less less because because i i went went on. on. i i began began to to picture picture to to myself, myself, as as a a scrap scrap of of newspaper newspaper intelligence, intelligence, my my being being found found dead dead in in a a day day or or two, two, under under some some hedge; hedge; and and i i trudged trudged on on miserably, miserably, though though as as fast fast as as i i could, could, until until i i happened happened to to pass pass a a little little shop, shop, where where it it was was written written up up that that ladies' ladies' and and gentlemen's gentlemen's wardrobes wardrobes were were bought, bought, and and that that the the best best price price was was given given for for rags, rags, bones, bones, and and kitchen-stuff. kitchen-stuff. the the master master of of this this shop shop was was sitting sitting at at the the door door in in his his shirt-sleeves, shirt-sleeves, smoking; smoking; and and as as there there were were a a great great many many coats coats and and pairs pairs of of trousers trousers dangling dangling from from the the low low ceiling, ceiling, and and only only two two feeble feeble candles candles burning burning inside inside to to show show what what they they were, were, i i fancied fancied that that he he looked looked like like a a man man of of a a revengeful revengeful disposition, disposition, who who had had hung hung all all his his enemies, enemies, and and was was enjoying enjoying himself. himself. my my late late experiences experiences with with mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber suggested suggested to to me me that that here here might might be be a a means means of of keeping keeping off off the the wolf wolf for for a a little little while. while. i i went went up up the the next next by-street, by-street, took took off off my my waistcoat, waistcoat, rolled rolled it it neatly neatly under under my my arm, arm, and and came came back back to to the the shop shop door. door. 'if 'if you please, please, sir,' sir,' i i said, said, 'i 'i am am to to sell sell this this for for a a fair fair price.' price.' mr. mr. dolloby dolloby -- -- dolloby dolloby was was the the name name over over the the shop shop door, door, at at least least -- -- took took the the waistcoat, waistcoat, stood stood his his pipe pipe on on its its head, head, against against the the door-post, door-post, went went into into the the shop, shop, followed followed by by me, me, snuffed snuffed the the two two candles candles with with his his fingers, fingers, spread spread the the waistcoat waistcoat on on the the counter, counter, and and looked looked at at it it there, there, held held it it up up against against the the light, light, and and looked looked at at it it there, there, and and ultimately ultimately said: said: 'what 'what do do you call call a a price, price, now, now, for for this this here here little little weskit?' weskit?' 'oh! 'oh! you know know best, best, sir,' sir,' i i returned returned modestly. modestly. 'i 'i can't can't be be buyer buyer and and seller seller too,' too,' said said mr. mr. dolloby. dolloby. 'put 'put a a price price on on this this here here little little weskit.' weskit.' 'would 'would eighteenpence eighteenpence be?' be?' -- -- i i hinted, hinted, after after some some hesitation. hesitation. mr. mr. dolloby dolloby rolled rolled it it up up again, again, and and gave gave it it me me back. back. 'i 'i should should rob rob my my family,' family,' he he said, said, 'if 'if i i was was to to offer offer ninepence ninepence for for it.' it.' this this was was a a disagreeable disagreeable way way of of putting putting the the business; business; because because it it imposed imposed upon upon me, me, a a perfect perfect stranger, stranger, the the unpleasantness unpleasantness of of asking asking mr. mr. dolloby dolloby to to rob rob his his family family on on my my account. account. my my circumstances circumstances being being so so very very pressing, pressing, however, however, i i said said i i would would take take ninepence ninepence for for it, it, if if he he pleased. pleased. mr. mr. dolloby, dolloby, not not without without some some grumbling, grumbling, gave gave ninepence. ninepence. i i wished wished him him good good night, night, and and walked walked out out of of the the shop shop the the richer richer by by that that sum, sum, and and the the poorer poorer by by a a waistcoat. waistcoat. but but when when i i buttoned buttoned my my jacket, jacket, that that was was not not much. much. indeed, indeed, i i foresaw foresaw pretty pretty clearly clearly that that my my jacket jacket would would go go next, next, and and that that i i should should have have to to make make the the best best of of my my way way to to dover dover in in a a shirt shirt and and a a pair pair of of trousers, trousers, and and might might deem deem myself myself lucky lucky if if i i got got there there even even in in that that trim. trim. but but my my mind mind did did not not run run so so much much on on this this as as might might be be supposed. supposed. beyond beyond a a general general impression impression of of the the distance distance before before me, me, and and of of the the young young man man with with the the donkey-cart donkey-cart having having used used me me cruelly, cruelly, i i think think i i had had no no very very urgent urgent sense sense of of my my difficulties difficulties when when i i once once again again set set off off with with my my ninepence ninepence in in my my pocket. pocket. a a plan plan had had occurred occurred to to me me for for passing passing the the night, night, which which i i was was going going to to carry carry into into execution. execution. this this was, was, to to lie lie behind behind the the wall wall at at the the back back of of my my old old school, school, in in a a corner corner where where there there used used to to be be a a haystack. haystack. i i imagined imagined it it would would be be a a kind kind of of company company to to have have the the boys, boys, and and the the bedroom bedroom where where i i used used to to tell tell the the stories, stories, so so near near me: me: although although the the boys boys would would know know nothing nothing of of my my being being there, there, and and the the bedroom bedroom would would yield yield me me no no shelter. shelter. i i had had had had a a hard hard day's day's work, work, and and was was pretty pretty well well jaded jaded when when i i came came climbing climbing out, out, at at last, last, upon upon the the level level of of blackheath. blackheath. it it cost cost me me some some trouble trouble to to find find out out salem salem house; house; but but i i found found it, it, and and i i found found a a haystack haystack in in the the corner, corner, and and i i lay lay down down by by it; it; having having first first walked walked round round the the wall, wall, and and looked looked up up at at the the windows, windows, and and seen seen that that all all was was dark dark and and silent silent within. within. never never shall shall i i forget forget the the lonely lonely sensation sensation of of first first lying lying down, down, without without a a roof roof above above my my head! head! sleep sleep came came upon upon me me as as it it came came on on many many other other outcasts, outcasts, against against whom whom house-doors house-doors were were locked, locked, and and house-dogs house-dogs barked, barked, that that night night -- -- and and i i dreamed dreamed of of lying lying on on my my old old school-bed, school-bed, talking talking to to the the boys boys in in my my room; room; and and found found myself myself sitting sitting upright, upright, with with steerforth's steerforth's name name upon upon my my lips, lips, looking looking wildly wildly at at the the stars stars that that were were glistening glistening and and glimmering glimmering above above me. me. when when i i remembered remembered where where i i was was at at that that untimely untimely hour, hour, a a feeling feeling stole stole upon upon me me that that made made me me get get up, up, afraid afraid of of i i don't don't know know what, what, and and walk walk about. about. but but the the fainter fainter glimmering glimmering of of the the stars, stars, and and the the pale pale light light in in the the sky sky where where the the day day was was coming, coming, reassured reassured me: me: and and my my eyes eyes being being very very heavy, heavy, i i lay lay down down again again and and slept slept -- -- though though with with a a knowledge knowledge in in my my sleep sleep that that it it was was cold cold -- -- until until the the warm warm beams beams of of the the sun, sun, and and the the ringing ringing of of the the getting-up getting-up bell bell at at salem salem house, house, awoke awoke me. me. if if i i could could have have hoped hoped that that steerforth steerforth was was there, there, i i would would have have lurked lurked about about until until he he came came out out alone; alone; but but i i knew knew he he must must have have left left long long since. since. traddles traddles still still remained, remained, perhaps, perhaps, but but it it was was very very doubtful; doubtful; and and i i had had not not sufficient sufficient confidence confidence in in his his discretion discretion or or good good luck, luck, however however strong strong my my reliance reliance was was on on his his good good nature, nature, to to wish wish to to trust trust him him with with my my situation. situation. so so i i crept crept away away from from the the wall wall as as mr. mr. creakle's creakle's boys boys were were getting getting up, up, and and struck struck into into the the long long dusty dusty track track which which i i had had first first known known to to be be the the dover dover road road when when i i was was one one of of them, them, and and when when i i little little expected expected that that any any eyes eyes would would ever ever see see me me the the wayfarer wayfarer i i was was now, now, upon upon it. it. what what a a different different sunday sunday morning morning from from the the old old sunday sunday morning morning at at yarmouth! yarmouth! in in due due time time i i heard heard the the church-bells church-bells ringing, ringing, as as i i plodded plodded on; on; and and i i met met people people who who were were going going to to church; church; and and i i passed passed a a church church or or two two where where the the congregation congregation were were inside, inside, and and the the sound sound of of singing singing came came out out into into the the sunshine, sunshine, while while the the beadle beadle sat sat and and cooled cooled himself himself in in the the shade shade of of the the porch, porch, or or stood stood beneath beneath the the yew-tree, yew-tree, with with his his hand hand to to his his forehead, forehead, glowering glowering at at me me going going by. by. but but the the peace peace and and rest rest of of the the old old sunday sunday morning morning were were on on everything, everything, except except me. me. that that was was the the difference. difference. i i felt felt quite quite wicked wicked in in my my dirt dirt and and dust, dust, with with my my tangled tangled hair. hair. but but for for the the quiet quiet picture picture i i had had conjured conjured up, up, of of my my mother mother in in her her youth youth and and beauty, beauty, weeping weeping by by the the fire, fire, and and my my aunt aunt relenting relenting to to her, her, i i hardly hardly think think i i should should have have had had the the courage courage to to go go on on until until next next day. day. but but it it always always went went before before me, me, and and i i followed. followed. i i got, got, that that sunday, sunday, through through three-and-twenty three-and-twenty miles miles on on the the straight straight road, road, though though not not very very easily, easily, for for i i was was new new to to that that kind kind of of toil. toil. i i see see myself, myself, as as evening evening closes closes in, in, coming coming over over the the bridge bridge at at rochester, rochester, footsore footsore and and tired, tired, and and eating eating bread bread that that i i had had bought bought for for supper. supper. one one or or two two little little houses, houses, with with the the notice, notice, 'lodgings 'lodgings for for travellers', travellers', hanging hanging out, out, had had tempted tempted me; me; but but i i was was afraid afraid of of spending spending the the few few pence pence i i had, had, and and was was even even more more afraid afraid of of the the vicious vicious looks looks of of the the trampers trampers i i had had met met or or overtaken. overtaken. i i sought sought no no shelter, shelter, therefore, therefore, but but the the sky; sky; and and toiling toiling into into chatham, chatham, -- -- which, which, in in that that night's night's aspect, aspect, is is a a mere mere dream dream of of chalk, chalk, and and drawbridges, drawbridges, and and mastless mastless ships ships in in a a muddy muddy river, river, roofed roofed like like noah's noah's arks, arks, -- -- crept, crept, at at last, last, upon upon a a sort sort of of grass-grown grass-grown battery battery overhanging overhanging a a lane, lane, where where a a sentry sentry was was walking walking to to and and fro. fro. here here i i lay lay down, down, near near a a cannon; cannon; and, and, happy happy in in the the society society of of the the sentry's sentry's footsteps, footsteps, though though he he knew knew no no more more of of my my being being above above him him than than the the boys boys at at salem salem house house had had known known of of my my lying lying by by the the wall, wall, slept slept soundly soundly until until morning. morning. very very stiff stiff and and sore sore of of foot foot i i was was in in the the morning, morning, and and quite quite dazed dazed by by the the beating beating of of drums drums and and marching marching of of troops, troops, which which seemed seemed to to hem hem me me in in on on every every side side when when i i went went down down towards towards the the long long narrow narrow street. street. feeling feeling that that i i could could go go but but a a very very little little way way that that day, day, if if i i were were to to reserve reserve any any strength strength for for getting getting to to my my journey's journey's end, end, i i resolved resolved to to make make the the sale sale of of my my jacket jacket its its principal principal business. business. accordingly, accordingly, i i took took the the jacket jacket off, off, that that i i might might learn learn to to do do without without it; it; and and carrying carrying it it under under my my arm, arm, began began a a tour tour of of inspection inspection of of the the various various slop-shops. slop-shops. it it was was a a likely likely place place to to sell sell a a jacket jacket in; in; for for the the dealers dealers in in second-hand second-hand clothes clothes were were numerous, numerous, and and were, were, generally generally speaking, speaking, on on the the look-out look-out for for customers customers at at their their shop shop doors. doors. but but as as most most of of them them had, had, hanging hanging up up among among their their stock, stock, an an officer's officer's coat coat or or two, two, epaulettes epaulettes and and all, all, i i was was rendered rendered timid timid by by the the costly costly nature nature of of their their dealings, dealings, and and walked walked about about for for a a long long time time without without offering offering my my merchandise merchandise to to anyone. anyone. this this modesty modesty of of mine mine directed directed my my attention attention to to the the marine-store marine-store shops, shops, and and such such shops shops as as mr. mr. dolloby's, dolloby's, in in preference preference to to the the regular regular dealers. dealers. at at last last i i found found one one that that i i thought thought looked looked promising, promising, at at the the corner corner of of a a dirty dirty lane, lane, ending ending in in an an enclosure enclosure full full of of stinging-nettles, stinging-nettles, against against the the palings palings of of which which some some second-hand second-hand sailors' sailors' clothes, clothes, that that seemed seemed to to have have overflowed overflowed the the shop, shop, were were fluttering fluttering among among some some cots, cots, and and rusty rusty guns, guns, and and oilskin oilskin hats, hats, and and certain certain trays trays full full of of so so many many old old rusty rusty keys keys of of so so many many sizes sizes that that they they seemed seemed various various enough enough to to open open all all the the doors doors in in the the world. world. into into this this shop, shop, which which was was low low and and small, small, and and which which was was darkened darkened rather rather than than lighted lighted by by a a little little window, window, overhung overhung with with clothes, clothes, and and was was descended descended into into by by some some steps, steps, i i went went with with a a palpitating palpitating heart; heart; which which was was not not relieved relieved when when an an ugly ugly old old man, man, with with the the lower lower part part of of his his face face all all covered covered with with a a stubbly stubbly grey grey beard, beard, rushed rushed out out of of a a dirty dirty den den behind behind it, it, and and seized seized me me by by the the hair hair of of my my head. head. he he was was a a dreadful dreadful old old man man to to look look at, at, in in a a filthy filthy flannel flannel waistcoat, waistcoat, and and smelling smelling terribly terribly of of rum. rum. his his bedstead, bedstead, covered covered with with a a tumbled tumbled and and ragged ragged piece piece of of patchwork, patchwork, was was in in the the den den he he had had come come from, from, where where another another little little window window showed showed a a prospect prospect of of more more stinging-nettles, stinging-nettles, and and a a lame lame donkey. donkey. 'oh, 'oh, what what do do you want?' want?' grinned grinned this this old old man, man, in in a a fierce, fierce, monotonous monotonous whine. whine. 'oh, 'oh, my my eyes eyes and and limbs, limbs, what what do do you want? want? oh, oh, my my lungs lungs and and liver, liver, what what do do you want? want? oh, oh, goroo, goroo, goroo!' goroo!' i i was was so so much much dismayed dismayed by by these these words, words, and and particularly particularly by by the the repetition repetition of of the the last last unknown unknown one, one, which which was was a a kind kind of of rattle rattle in in his his throat, throat, that that i i could could make make no no answer; answer; hereupon hereupon the the old old man, man, still still holding holding me me by by the the hair, hair, repeated: repeated: 'oh, 'oh, what what do do you want? want? oh, oh, my my eyes eyes and and limbs, limbs, what what do do you want? want? oh, oh, my my lungs lungs and and liver, liver, what what do do you want? want? oh, oh, goroo!' goroo!' -- -- which which he he screwed screwed out out of of himself, himself, with with an an energy energy that that made made his his eyes eyes start start in in his his head. head. 'i 'i wanted wanted to to know,' know,' i i said, said, trembling, trembling, 'if 'if you would would buy buy a a jacket.' jacket.' 'oh, 'oh, let's let's see see the the jacket!' jacket!' cried cried the the old old man. man. 'oh, 'oh, my my heart heart on on fire, fire, show show the the jacket jacket to to us! us! oh, oh, my my eyes eyes and and limbs, limbs, bring bring the the jacket jacket out!' out!' with with that that he he took took his his trembling trembling hands, hands, which which were were like like the the claws claws of of a a great great bird, bird, out out of of my my hair; hair; and and put put on on a a pair pair of of spectacles, spectacles, not not at at all all ornamental ornamental to to his his inflamed inflamed eyes. eyes. 'oh, 'oh, how how much much for for the the jacket?' jacket?' cried cried the the old old man, man, after after examining examining it. it. 'oh 'oh -- -- goroo! goroo! -- -- how how much much for for the the jacket?' jacket?' 'half-a-crown,' 'half-a-crown,' i i answered, answered, recovering recovering myself. myself. 'oh, 'oh, my my lungs lungs and and liver,' liver,' cried cried the the old old man, man, 'no! 'no! oh, oh, my my eyes, eyes, no! no! oh, oh, my my limbs, limbs, no! no! eighteenpence. eighteenpence. goroo!' goroo!' every every time time he he uttered uttered this this ejaculation, ejaculation, his his eyes eyes seemed seemed to to be be in in danger danger of of starting starting out; out; and and every every sentence sentence he he spoke, spoke, he he delivered delivered in in a a sort sort of of tune, tune, always always exactly exactly the the same, same, and and more more like like a a gust gust of of wind, wind, which which begins begins low, low, mounts mounts up up high, high, and and falls falls again, again, than than any any other other comparison comparison i i can can find find for for it. it. 'well,' 'well,' said said i, i, glad glad to to have have closed closed the the bargain, bargain, 'i'll 'i'll take take eighteenpence.' eighteenpence.' 'oh, 'oh, my my liver!' liver!' cried cried the the old old man, man, throwing throwing the the jacket jacket on on a a shelf. shelf. 'get 'get out out of of the the shop! shop! oh, oh, my my lungs, lungs, get get out out of of the the shop! shop! oh, oh, my my eyes eyes and and limbs limbs -- -- goroo! goroo! -- -- don't don't ask ask for for money; money; make make it it an an exchange.' exchange.' i i never never was was so so frightened frightened in in my my life, life, before before or or since; since; but but i i told told him him humbly humbly that that i i wanted wanted money, money, and and that that nothing nothing else else was was of of any any use use to to me, me, but but that that i i would would wait wait for for it, it, as as he he desired, desired, outside, outside, and and had had no no wish wish to to hurry hurry him. him. so so i i went went outside, outside, and and sat sat down down in in the the shade shade in in a a corner. corner. and and i i sat sat there there so so many many hours, hours, that that the the shade shade became became sunlight, sunlight, and and the the sunlight sunlight became became shade shade again, again, and and still still i i sat sat there there waiting waiting for for the the money. money. there there never never was was such such another another drunken drunken madman madman in in that that line line of of business, business, i i hope. hope. that that he he was was well well known known in in the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, and and enjoyed enjoyed the the reputation reputation of of having having sold sold himself himself to to the the devil, devil, i i soon soon understood understood from from the the visits visits he he received received from from the the boys, boys, who who continually continually came came skirmishing skirmishing about about the the shop, shop, shouting shouting that that legend, legend, and and calling calling to to him him to to bring bring out out his his gold. gold. 'you ain't ain't poor, poor, you know, know, charley, charley, as as you pretend. pretend. bring bring out out your your gold. gold. bring bring out out some some of of the the gold gold you sold sold yourself yourself to to the the devil devil for. for. come! come! it's it's in in the the lining lining of of the the mattress, mattress, charley. charley. rip rip it it open open and and let's let's have have some!' some!' this, this, and and many many offers offers to to lend lend him him a a knife knife for for the the purpose, purpose, exasperated exasperated him him to to such such a a degree, degree, that that the the whole whole day day was was a a succession succession of of rushes rushes on on his his part, part, and and flights flights on on the the part part of of the the boys. boys. sometimes sometimes in in his his rage rage he he would would take take me me for for one one of of them, them, and and come come at at me, me, mouthing mouthing as as if if he he were were going going to to tear tear me me in in pieces; pieces; then, then, remembering remembering me, me, just just in in time, time, would would dive dive into into the the shop, shop, and and lie lie upon upon his his bed, bed, as as i i thought thought from from the the sound sound of of his his voice, voice, yelling yelling in in a a frantic frantic way, way, to to his his own own windy windy tune, tune, the the 'death 'death of of nelson'; nelson'; with with an an oh! oh! before before every every line, line, and and innumerable innumerable goroos goroos interspersed. interspersed. as as if if this this were were not not bad bad enough enough for for me, me, the the boys, boys, connecting connecting me me with with the the establishment, establishment, on on account account of of the the patience patience and and perseverance perseverance with with which which i i sat sat outside, outside, half-dressed, half-dressed, pelted pelted me, me, and and used used me me very very ill ill all all day. day. he he made made many many attempts attempts to to induce induce me me to to consent consent to to an an exchange; exchange; at at one one time time coming coming out out with with a a fishing-rod, fishing-rod, at at another another with with a a fiddle, fiddle, at at another another with with a a cocked cocked hat, hat, at at another another with with a a flute. flute. but but i i resisted resisted all all these these overtures, overtures, and and sat sat there there in in desperation; desperation; each each time time asking asking him, him, with with tears tears in in my my eyes, eyes, for for my my money money or or my my jacket. jacket. at at last last he he began began to to pay pay me me in in halfpence halfpence at at a a time; time; and and was was full full two two hours hours getting getting by by easy easy stages stages to to a a shilling. shilling. 'oh, 'oh, my my eyes eyes and and limbs!' limbs!' he he then then cried, cried, peeping peeping hideously hideously out out of of the the shop, shop, after after a a long long pause, pause, 'will 'will you go go for for twopence twopence more?' more?' 'i 'i can't,' can't,' i i said; said; 'i 'i shall shall be be starved.' starved.' 'oh, 'oh, my my lungs lungs and and liver, liver, will will you go go for for threepence?' threepence?' 'i 'i would would go go for for nothing, nothing, if if i i could,' could,' i i said, said, 'but 'but i i want want the the money money badly.' badly.' 'oh, 'oh, go-roo!' go-roo!' (it (it is is really really impossible impossible to to express express how how he he twisted twisted this this ejaculation ejaculation out out of of himself, himself, as as he he peeped peeped round round the the door-post door-post at at me, me, showing showing nothing nothing but but his his crafty crafty old old head); head); 'will 'will you go go for for fourpence?' fourpence?' i i was was so so faint faint and and weary weary that that i i closed closed with with this this offer; offer; and and taking taking the the money money out out of of his his claw, claw, not not without without trembling, trembling, went went away away more more hungry hungry and and thirsty thirsty than than i i had had ever ever been, been, a a little little before before sunset. sunset. but but at at an an expense expense of of threepence threepence i i soon soon refreshed refreshed myself myself completely; completely; and, and, being being in in better better spirits spirits then, then, limped limped seven seven miles miles upon upon my my road. road. my my bed bed at at night night was was under under another another haystack, haystack, where where i i rested rested comfortably, comfortably, after after having having washed washed my my blistered blistered feet feet in in a a stream, stream, and and dressed dressed them them as as well well as as i i was was able, able, with with some some cool cool leaves. leaves. when when i i took took the the road road again again next next morning, morning, i i found found that that it it lay lay through through a a succession succession of of hop-grounds hop-grounds and and orchards. orchards. it it was was sufficiently sufficiently late late in in the the year year for for the the orchards orchards to to be be ruddy ruddy with with ripe ripe apples; apples; and and in in a a few few places places the the hop-pickers hop-pickers were were already already at at work. work. i i thought thought it it all all extremely extremely beautiful, beautiful, and and made made up up my my mind mind to to sleep sleep among among the the hops hops that that night: night: imagining imagining some some cheerful cheerful companionship companionship in in the the long long perspectives perspectives of of poles, poles, with with the the graceful graceful leaves leaves twining twining round round them. them. the the trampers trampers were were worse worse than than ever ever that that day, day, and and inspired inspired me me with with a a dread dread that that is is yet yet quite quite fresh fresh in in my my mind. mind. some some of of them them were were most most ferocious-looking ferocious-looking ruffians, ruffians, who who stared stared at at me me as as i i went went by; by; and and stopped, stopped, perhaps, perhaps, and and called called after after me me to to come come back back and and speak speak to to them, them, and and when when i i took took to to my my heels, heels, stoned stoned me. me. i i recollect recollect one one young young fellow fellow -- -- a a tinker, tinker, i i suppose, suppose, from from his his wallet wallet and and brazier brazier -- -- who who had had a a woman woman with with him, him, and and who who faced faced about about and and stared stared at at me me thus; thus; and and then then roared roared to to me me in in such such a a tremendous tremendous voice voice to to come come back, back, that that i i halted halted and and looked looked round. round. 'come 'come here, here, when when you're you're called,' called,' said said the the tinker, tinker, 'or 'or i'll i'll rip rip your your young young body body open.' open.' i i thought thought it it best best to to go go back. back. as as i i drew drew nearer nearer to to them, them, trying trying to to propitiate propitiate the the tinker tinker by by my my looks, looks, i i observed observed that that the the woman woman had had a a black black eye. eye. 'where 'where are are you going?' going?' said said the the tinker, tinker, gripping gripping the the bosom bosom of of my my shirt shirt with with his his blackened blackened hand. hand. 'i 'i am am going going to to dover,' dover,' i i said. said. 'where 'where do do you come come from?' from?' asked asked the the tinker, tinker, giving giving his his hand hand another another turn turn in in my my shirt, shirt, to to hold hold me me more more securely. securely. 'i 'i come come from from london,' london,' i i said. said. 'what 'what lay lay are are you upon?' upon?' asked asked the the tinker. tinker. 'are 'are you a a prig?' prig?' 'n-no,' 'n-no,' i i said. said. 'ain't 'ain't you, by by g g -- -- ? ? if if you make make a a brag brag of of your your honesty honesty to to me,' me,' said said the the tinker, tinker, 'i'll 'i'll knock knock your your brains brains out.' out.' with with his his disengaged disengaged hand hand he he made made a a menace menace of of striking striking me, me, and and then then looked looked at at me me from from head head to to foot. foot. 'have 'have you got got the the price price of of a a pint pint of of beer beer about about you?' said said the the tinker. tinker. 'if 'if you have, have, out out with with it, it, afore afore i i take take it it away!' away!' i i should should certainly certainly have have produced produced it, it, but but that that i i met met the the woman's woman's look, look, and and saw saw her her very very slightly slightly shake shake her her head, head, and and form form 'no!' 'no!' with with her her lips. lips. 'i 'i am am very very poor,' poor,' i i said, said, attempting attempting to to smile, smile, 'and 'and have have got got no no money.' money.' 'why, 'why, what what do do you mean?' mean?' said said the the tinker, tinker, looking looking so so sternly sternly at at me, me, that that i i almost almost feared feared he he saw saw the the money money in in my my pocket. pocket. 'sir!' 'sir!' i i stammered. stammered. 'what 'what do do you mean,' mean,' said said the the tinker, tinker, 'by 'by wearing wearing my my brother's brother's silk silk handkerchief! handkerchief! give give it it over over here!' here!' and and he he had had mine mine off off my my neck neck in in a a moment, moment, and and tossed tossed it it to to the the woman. woman. the the woman woman burst burst into into a a fit fit of of laughter, laughter, as as if if she she thought thought this this a a joke, joke, and and tossed tossed it it back back to to me, me, nodded nodded once, once, as as slightly slightly as as before, before, and and made made the the word word 'go!' 'go!' with with her her lips. lips. before before i i could could obey, obey, however, however, the the tinker tinker seized seized the the handkerchief handkerchief out out of of my my hand hand with with a a roughness roughness that that threw threw me me away away like like a a feather, feather, and and putting putting it it loosely loosely round round his his own own neck, neck, turned turned upon upon the the woman woman with with an an oath, oath, and and knocked knocked her her down. down. i i never never shall shall forget forget seeing seeing her her fall fall backward backward on on the the hard hard road, road, and and lie lie there there with with her her bonnet bonnet tumbled tumbled off, off, and and her her hair hair all all whitened whitened in in the the dust; dust; nor, nor, when when i i looked looked back back from from a a distance, distance, seeing seeing her her sitting sitting on on the the pathway, pathway, which which was was a a bank bank by by the the roadside, roadside, wiping wiping the the blood blood from from her her face face with with a a corner corner of of her her shawl, shawl, while while he he went went on on ahead. ahead. this this adventure adventure frightened frightened me me so, so, that, that, afterwards, afterwards, when when i i saw saw any any of of these these people people coming, coming, i i turned turned back back until until i i could could find find a a hiding-place, hiding-place, where where i i remained remained until until they they had had gone gone out out of of sight; sight; which which happened happened so so often, often, that that i i was was very very seriously seriously delayed. delayed. but but under under this this difficulty, difficulty, as as under under all all the the other other difficulties difficulties of of my my journey, journey, i i seemed seemed to to be be sustained sustained and and led led on on by by my my fanciful fanciful picture picture of of my my mother mother in in her her youth, youth, before before i i came came into into the the world. world. it it always always kept kept me me company. company. it it was was there, there, among among the the hops, hops, when when i i lay lay down down to to sleep; sleep; it it was was with with me me on on my my waking waking in in the the morning; morning; it it went went before before me me all all day. day. i i have have associated associated it, it, ever ever since, since, with with the the sunny sunny street street of of canterbury, canterbury, dozing dozing as as it it were were in in the the hot hot light; light; and and with with the the sight sight of of its its old old houses houses and and gateways, gateways, and and the the stately, stately, grey grey cathedral, cathedral, with with the the rooks rooks sailing sailing round round the the towers. towers. when when i i came, came, at at last, last, upon upon the the bare, bare, wide wide downs downs near near dover, dover, it it relieved relieved the the solitary solitary aspect aspect of of the the scene scene with with hope; hope; and and not not until until i i reached reached that that first first great great aim aim of of my my journey, journey, and and actually actually set set foot foot in in the the town town itself, itself, on on the the sixth sixth day day of of my my flight, flight, did did it it desert desert me. me. but but then, then, strange strange to to say, say, when when i i stood stood with with my my ragged ragged shoes, shoes, and and my my dusty, dusty, sunburnt, sunburnt, half-clothed half-clothed figure, figure, in in the the place place so so long long desired, desired, it it seemed seemed to to vanish vanish like like a a dream, dream, and and to to leave leave me me helpless helpless and and dispirited. dispirited. i i inquired inquired about about my my aunt aunt among among the the boatmen boatmen first, first, and and received received various various answers. answers. one one said said she she lived lived in in the the south south foreland foreland light, light, and and had had singed singed her her whiskers whiskers by by doing doing so; so; another, another, that that she she was was made made fast fast to to the the great great buoy buoy outside outside the the harbour, harbour, and and could could only only be be visited visited at at half-tide; half-tide; a a third, third, that that she she was was locked locked up up in in maidstone maidstone jail jail for for child-stealing; child-stealing; a a fourth, fourth, that that she she was was seen seen to to mount mount a a broom broom in in the the last last high high wind, wind, and and make make direct direct for for calais. calais. the the fly-drivers, fly-drivers, among among whom whom i i inquired inquired next, next, were were equally equally jocose jocose and and equally equally disrespectful; disrespectful; and and the the shopkeepers, shopkeepers, not not liking liking my my appearance, appearance, generally generally replied, replied, without without hearing hearing what what i i had had to to say, say, that that they they had had got got nothing nothing for for me. me. i i felt felt more more miserable miserable and and destitute destitute than than i i had had done done at at any any period period of of my my running running away. away. my my money money was was all all gone, gone, i i had had nothing nothing left left to to dispose dispose of; of; i i was was hungry, hungry, thirsty, thirsty, and and worn worn out; out; and and seemed seemed as as distant distant from from my my end end as as if if i i had had remained remained in in london. london. the the morning morning had had worn worn away away in in these these inquiries, inquiries, and and i i was was sitting sitting on on the the step step of of an an empty empty shop shop at at a a street street corner, corner, near near the the market-place, market-place, deliberating deliberating upon upon wandering wandering towards towards those those other other places places which which had had been been mentioned, mentioned, when when a a fly-driver, fly-driver, coming coming by by with with his his carriage, carriage, dropped dropped a a horsecloth. horsecloth. something something good-natured good-natured in in the the man's man's face, face, as as i i handed handed it it up, up, encouraged encouraged me me to to ask ask him him if if he he could could tell tell me me where where miss miss trotwood trotwood lived; lived; though though i i had had asked asked the the question question so so often, often, that that it it almost almost died died upon upon my my lips. lips. 'trotwood,' 'trotwood,' said said he. he. 'let 'let me me see. see. i i know know the the name, name, too. too. old old lady?' lady?' 'yes,' 'yes,' i i said, said, 'rather.' 'rather.' 'pretty 'pretty stiff stiff in in the the back?' back?' said said he, he, making making himself himself upright. upright. 'yes,' 'yes,' i i said. said. 'i 'i should should think think it it very very likely.' likely.' 'carries 'carries a a bag?' bag?' said said he he -- -- 'bag 'bag with with a a good good deal deal of of room room in in it it -- -- is is gruffish, gruffish, and and comes comes down down upon upon you, sharp?' sharp?' my my heart heart sank sank within within me me as as i i acknowledged acknowledged the the undoubted undoubted accuracy accuracy of of this this description. description. 'why 'why then, then, i i tell tell you what,' what,' said said he. he. 'if 'if you go go up up there,' there,' pointing pointing with with his his whip whip towards towards the the heights, heights, 'and 'and keep keep right right on on till till you come come to to some some houses houses facing facing the the sea, sea, i i think think you'll you'll hear hear of of her. her. my my opinion opinion is is she she won't won't stand stand anything, anything, so so here's here's a a penny penny for for you.' i i accepted accepted the the gift gift thankfully, thankfully, and and bought bought a a loaf loaf with with it. it. dispatching dispatching this this refreshment refreshment by by the the way, way, i i went went in in the the direction direction my my friend friend had had indicated, indicated, and and walked walked on on a a good good distance distance without without coming coming to to the the houses houses he he had had mentioned. mentioned. at at length length i i saw saw some some before before me; me; and and approaching approaching them, them, went went into into a a little little shop shop (it (it was was what what we we used used to to call call a a general general shop, shop, at at home), home), and and inquired inquired if if they they could could have have the the goodness goodness to to tell tell me me where where miss miss trotwood trotwood lived. lived. i i addressed addressed myself myself to to a a man man behind behind the the counter, counter, who who was was weighing weighing some some rice rice for for a a young young woman; woman; but but the the latter, latter, taking taking the the inquiry inquiry to to herself, herself, turned turned round round quickly. quickly. 'my 'my mistress?' mistress?' she she said. said. 'what 'what do do you want want with with her, her, boy?' boy?' 'i 'i want,' want,' i i replied, replied, 'to 'to speak speak to to her, her, if if you please.' please.' 'to 'to beg beg of of her, her, you mean,' mean,' retorted retorted the the damsel. damsel. 'no,' 'no,' i i said, said, 'indeed.' 'indeed.' but but suddenly suddenly remembering remembering that that in in truth truth i i came came for for no no other other purpose, purpose, i i held held my my peace peace in in confusion, confusion, and and felt felt my my face face burn. burn. my my aunt's aunt's handmaid, handmaid, as as i i supposed supposed she she was was from from what what she she had had said, said, put put her her rice rice in in a a little little basket basket and and walked walked out out of of the the shop; shop; telling telling me me that that i i could could follow follow her, her, if if i i wanted wanted to to know know where where miss miss trotwood trotwood lived. lived. i i needed needed no no second second permission; permission; though though i i was was by by this this time time in in such such a a state state of of consternation consternation and and agitation, agitation, that that my my legs legs shook shook under under me. me. i i followed followed the the young young woman, woman, and and we we soon soon came came to to a a very very neat neat little little cottage cottage with with cheerful cheerful bow-windows: bow-windows: in in front front of of it, it, a a small small square square gravelled gravelled court court or or garden garden full full of of flowers, flowers, carefully carefully tended, tended, and and smelling smelling deliciously. deliciously. 'this 'this is is miss miss trotwood's,' trotwood's,' said said the the young young woman. woman. 'now 'now you know; know; and and that's that's all all i i have have got got to to say.' say.' with with which which words words she she hurried hurried into into the the house, house, as as if if to to shake shake off off the the responsibility responsibility of of my my appearance; appearance; and and left left me me standing standing at at the the garden-gate, garden-gate, looking looking disconsolately disconsolately over over the the top top of of it it towards towards the the parlour parlour window, window, where where a a muslin muslin curtain curtain partly partly undrawn undrawn in in the the middle, middle, a a large large round round green green screen screen or or fan fan fastened fastened on on to to the the windowsill, windowsill, a a small small table, table, and and a a great great chair, chair, suggested suggested to to me me that that my my aunt aunt might might be be at at that that moment moment seated seated in in awful awful state. state. my my shoes shoes were were by by this this time time in in a a woeful woeful condition. condition. the the soles soles had had shed shed themselves themselves bit bit by by bit, bit, and and the the upper upper leathers leathers had had broken broken and and burst burst until until the the very very shape shape and and form form of of shoes shoes had had departed departed from from them. them. my my hat hat (which (which had had served served me me for for a a night-cap, night-cap, too) too) was was so so crushed crushed and and bent, bent, that that no no old old battered battered handleless handleless saucepan saucepan on on a a dunghill dunghill need need have have been been ashamed ashamed to to vie vie with with it. it. my my shirt shirt and and trousers, trousers, stained stained with with heat, heat, dew, dew, grass, grass, and and the the kentish kentish soil soil on on which which i i had had slept slept -- -- and and torn torn besides besides -- -- might might have have frightened frightened the the birds birds from from my my aunt's aunt's garden, garden, as as i i stood stood at at the the gate. gate. my my hair hair had had known known no no comb comb or or brush brush since since i i left left london. london. my my face, face, neck, neck, and and hands, hands, from from unaccustomed unaccustomed exposure exposure to to the the air air and and sun, sun, were were burnt burnt to to a a berry-brown. berry-brown. from from head head to to foot foot i i was was powdered powdered almost almost as as white white with with chalk chalk and and dust, dust, as as if if i i had had come come out out of of a a lime-kiln. lime-kiln. in in this this plight, plight, and and with with a a strong strong consciousness consciousness of of it, it, i i waited waited to to introduce introduce myself myself to, to, and and make make my my first first impression impression on, on, my my formidable formidable aunt. aunt. the the unbroken unbroken stillness stillness of of the the parlour parlour window window leading leading me me to to infer, infer, after after a a while, while, that that she she was was not not there, there, i i lifted lifted up up my my eyes eyes to to the the window window above above it, it, where where i i saw saw a a florid, florid, pleasant-looking pleasant-looking gentleman, gentleman, with with a a grey grey head, head, who who shut shut up up one one eye eye in in a a grotesque grotesque manner, manner, nodded nodded his his head head at at me me several several times, times, shook shook it it at at me me as as often, often, laughed, laughed, and and went went away. away. i i had had been been discomposed discomposed enough enough before; before; but but i i was was so so much much the the more more discomposed discomposed by by this this unexpected unexpected behaviour, behaviour, that that i i was was on on the the point point of of slinking slinking off, off, to to think think how how i i had had best best proceed, proceed, when when there there came came out out of of the the house house a a lady lady with with her her handkerchief handkerchief tied tied over over her her cap, cap, and and a a pair pair of of gardening gardening gloves gloves on on her her hands, hands, wearing wearing a a gardening gardening pocket pocket like like a a toll-man's toll-man's apron, apron, and and carrying carrying a a great great knife. knife. i i knew knew her her immediately immediately to to be be miss miss betsey, betsey, for for she she came came stalking stalking out out of of the the house house exactly exactly as as my my poor poor mother mother had had so so often often described described her her stalking stalking up up our our garden garden at at blunderstone blunderstone rookery. rookery. 'go 'go away!' away!' said said miss miss betsey, betsey, shaking shaking her her head, head, and and making making a a distant distant chop chop in in the the air air with with her her knife. knife. 'go 'go along! along! no no boys boys here!' here!' i i watched watched her, her, with with my my heart heart at at my my lips, lips, as as she she marched marched to to a a corner corner of of her her garden, garden, and and stooped stooped to to dig dig up up some some little little root root there. there. then, then, without without a a scrap scrap of of courage, courage, but but with with a a great great deal deal of of desperation, desperation, i i went went softly softly in in and and stood stood beside beside her, her, touching touching her her with with my my finger. finger. 'if 'if you please, please, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i began. began. she she started started and and looked looked up. up. 'if 'if you please, please, aunt.' aunt.' 'eh?' 'eh?' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss betsey, betsey, in in a a tone tone of of amazement amazement i i have have never never heard heard approached. approached. 'if 'if you please, please, aunt, aunt, i i am am your your nephew.' nephew.' 'oh, 'oh, lord!' lord!' said said my my aunt. aunt. and and sat sat flat flat down down in in the the garden-path. garden-path. 'i 'i am am david david copperfield, copperfield, of of blunderstone, blunderstone, in in suffolk suffolk -- -- where where you came, came, on on the the night night when when i i was was born, born, and and saw saw my my dear dear mama. mama. i i have have been been very very unhappy unhappy since since she she died. died. i i have have been been slighted, slighted, and and taught taught nothing, nothing, and and thrown thrown upon upon myself, myself, and and put put to to work work not not fit fit for for me. me. it it made made me me run run away away to to you. i i was was robbed robbed at at first first setting setting out, out, and and have have walked walked all all the the way, way, and and have have never never slept slept in in a a bed bed since since i i began began the the journey.' journey.' here here my my self-support self-support gave gave way way all all at at once; once; and and with with a a movement movement of of my my hands, hands, intended intended to to show show her her my my ragged ragged state, state, and and call call it it to to witness witness that that i i had had suffered suffered something, something, i i broke broke into into a a passion passion of of crying, crying, which which i i suppose suppose had had been been pent pent up up within within me me all all the the week. week. my my aunt, aunt, with with every every sort sort of of expression expression but but wonder wonder discharged discharged from from her her countenance, countenance, sat sat on on the the gravel, gravel, staring staring at at me, me, until until i i began began to to cry; cry; when when she she got got up up in in a a great great hurry, hurry, collared collared me, me, and and took took me me into into the the parlour. parlour. her her first first proceeding proceeding there there was was to to unlock unlock a a tall tall press, press, bring bring out out several several bottles, bottles, and and pour pour some some of of the the contents contents of of each each into into my my mouth. mouth. i i think think they they must must have have been been taken taken out out at at random, random, for for i i am am sure sure i i tasted tasted aniseed aniseed water, water, anchovy anchovy sauce, sauce, and and salad salad dressing. dressing. when when she she had had administered administered these these restoratives, restoratives, as as i i was was still still quite quite hysterical, hysterical, and and unable unable to to control control my my sobs, sobs, she she put put me me on on the the sofa, sofa, with with a a shawl shawl under under my my head, head, and and the the handkerchief handkerchief from from her her own own head head under under my my feet, feet, lest lest i i should should sully sully the the cover; cover; and and then, then, sitting sitting herself herself down down behind behind the the green green fan fan or or screen screen i i have have already already mentioned, mentioned, so so that that i i could could not not see see her her face, face, ejaculated ejaculated at at intervals, intervals, 'mercy 'mercy on on us!' us!' letting letting those those exclamations exclamations off off like like minute minute guns. guns. after after a a time time she she rang rang the the bell. bell. 'janet,' 'janet,' said said my my aunt, aunt, when when her her servant servant came came in. in. 'go 'go upstairs, upstairs, give give my my compliments compliments to to mr. mr. dick, dick, and and say say i i wish wish to to speak speak to to him.' him.' janet janet looked looked a a little little surprised surprised to to see see me me lying lying stiffly stiffly on on the the sofa sofa (i (i was was afraid afraid to to move move lest lest it it should should be be displeasing displeasing to to my my aunt), aunt), but but went went on on her her errand. errand. my my aunt, aunt, with with her her hands hands behind behind her, her, walked walked up up and and down down the the room, room, until until the the gentleman gentleman who who had had squinted squinted at at me me from from the the upper upper window window came came in in laughing. laughing. 'mr. 'mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'don't 'don't be be a a fool, fool, because because nobody nobody can can be be more more discreet discreet than than you can, can, when when you choose. choose. we we all all know know that. that. so so don't don't be be a a fool, fool, whatever whatever you are.' are.' the the gentleman gentleman was was serious serious immediately, immediately, and and looked looked at at me, me, i i thought, thought, as as if if he he would would entreat entreat me me to to say say nothing nothing about about the the window. window. 'mr. 'mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'you have have heard heard me me mention mention david david copperfield? copperfield? now now don't don't pretend pretend not not to to have have a a memory, memory, because because you and and i i know know better.' better.' 'david 'david copperfield?' copperfield?' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, who who did did not not appear appear to to me me to to remember remember much much about about it. it. 'david 'david copperfield? copperfield? oh oh yes, yes, to to be be sure. sure. david, david, certainly.' certainly.' 'well,' 'well,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'this 'this is is his his boy boy -- -- his his son. son. he he would would be be as as like like his his father father as as it's it's possible possible to to be, be, if if he he was was not not so so like like his his mother, mother, too.' too.' 'his 'his son?' son?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'david's 'david's son? son? indeed!' indeed!' 'yes,' 'yes,' pursued pursued my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and he he has has done done a a pretty pretty piece piece of of business. business. he he has has run run away. away. ah! ah! his his sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, never never would would have have run run away.' away.' my my aunt aunt shook shook her her head head firmly, firmly, confident confident in in the the character character and and behaviour behaviour of of the the girl girl who who never never was was born. born. 'oh! 'oh! you think think she she wouldn't wouldn't have have run run away?' away?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'bless 'bless and and save save the the man,' man,' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt, aunt, sharply, sharply, 'how 'how he he talks! talks! don't don't i i know know she she wouldn't? wouldn't? she she would would have have lived lived with with her her god-mother, god-mother, and and we we should should have have been been devoted devoted to to one one another. another. where, where, in in the the name name of of wonder, wonder, should should his his sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, have have run run from, from, or or to?' to?' 'nowhere,' 'nowhere,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'well 'well then,' then,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, softened softened by by the the reply, reply, 'how 'how can can you pretend pretend to to be be wool-gathering, wool-gathering, dick, dick, when when you are are as as sharp sharp as as a a surgeon's surgeon's lancet? lancet? now, now, here here you see see young young david david copperfield, copperfield, and and the the question question i i put put to to you is, is, what what shall shall i i do do with with him?' him?' 'what 'what shall shall you do do with with him?' him?' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, feebly, feebly, scratching scratching his his head. head. 'oh! 'oh! do do with with him?' him?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a grave grave look, look, and and her her forefinger forefinger held held up. up. 'come! 'come! i i want want some some very very sound sound advice.' advice.' 'why, 'why, if if i i was was you,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, considering, considering, and and looking looking vacantly vacantly at at me, me, 'i 'i should should -- -- ' ' the the contemplation contemplation of of me me seemed seemed to to inspire inspire him him with with a a sudden sudden idea, idea, and and he he added, added, briskly, briskly, 'i 'i should should wash wash him!' him!' 'janet,' 'janet,' said said my my aunt, aunt, turning turning round round with with a a quiet quiet triumph, triumph, which which i i did did not not then then understand, understand, 'mr. 'mr. dick dick sets sets us us all all right. right. heat heat the the bath!' bath!' although although i i was was deeply deeply interested interested in in this this dialogue, dialogue, i i could could not not help help observing observing my my aunt, aunt, mr. mr. dick, dick, and and janet, janet, while while it it was was in in progress, progress, and and completing completing a a survey survey i i had had already already been been engaged engaged in in making making of of the the room. room. my my aunt aunt was was a a tall, tall, hard-featured hard-featured lady, lady, but but by by no no means means ill-looking. ill-looking. there there was was an an inflexibility inflexibility in in her her face, face, in in her her voice, voice, in in her her gait gait and and carriage, carriage, amply amply sufficient sufficient to to account account for for the the effect effect she she had had made made upon upon a a gentle gentle creature creature like like my my mother; mother; but but her her features features were were rather rather handsome handsome than than otherwise, otherwise, though though unbending unbending and and austere. austere. i i particularly particularly noticed noticed that that she she had had a a very very quick, quick, bright bright eye. eye. her her hair, hair, which which was was grey, grey, was was arranged arranged in in two two plain plain divisions, divisions, under under what what i i believe believe would would be be called called a a mob-cap; mob-cap; i i mean mean a a cap, cap, much much more more common common then then than than now, now, with with side-pieces side-pieces fastening fastening under under the the chin. chin. her her dress dress was was of of a a lavender lavender colour, colour, and and perfectly perfectly neat; neat; but but scantily scantily made, made, as as if if she she desired desired to to be be as as little little encumbered encumbered as as possible. possible. i i remember remember that that i i thought thought it, it, in in form, form, more more like like a a riding-habit riding-habit with with the the superfluous superfluous skirt skirt cut cut off, off, than than anything anything else. else. she she wore wore at at her her side side a a gentleman's gentleman's gold gold watch, watch, if if i i might might judge judge from from its its size size and and make, make, with with an an appropriate appropriate chain chain and and seals; seals; she she had had some some linen linen at at her her throat throat not not unlike unlike a a shirt-collar, shirt-collar, and and things things at at her her wrists wrists like like little little shirt-wristbands. shirt-wristbands. mr. mr. dick, dick, as as i i have have already already said, said, was was grey-headed, grey-headed, and and florid: florid: i i should should have have said said all all about about him, him, in in saying saying so, so, had had not not his his head head been been curiously curiously bowed bowed -- -- not not by by age; age; it it reminded reminded me me of of one one of of mr. mr. creakle's creakle's boys' boys' heads heads after after a a beating beating -- -- and and his his grey grey eyes eyes prominent prominent and and large, large, with with a a strange strange kind kind of of watery watery brightness brightness in in them them that that made made me, me, in in combination combination with with his his vacant vacant manner, manner, his his submission submission to to my my aunt, aunt, and and his his childish childish delight delight when when she she praised praised him, him, suspect suspect him him of of being being a a little little mad; mad; though, though, if if he he were were mad, mad, how how he he came came to to be be there there puzzled puzzled me me extremely. extremely. he he was was dressed dressed like like any any other other ordinary ordinary gentleman, gentleman, in in a a loose loose grey grey morning morning coat coat and and waistcoat, waistcoat, and and white white trousers; trousers; and and had had his his watch watch in in his his fob, fob, and and his his money money in in his his pockets: pockets: which which he he rattled rattled as as if if he he were were very very proud proud of of it. it. janet janet was was a a pretty pretty blooming blooming girl, girl, of of about about nineteen nineteen or or twenty, twenty, and and a a perfect perfect picture picture of of neatness. neatness. though though i i made made no no further further observation observation of of her her at at the the moment, moment, i i may may mention mention here here what what i i did did not not discover discover until until afterwards, afterwards, namely, namely, that that she she was was one one of of a a series series of of protegees protegees whom whom my my aunt aunt had had taken taken into into her her service service expressly expressly to to educate educate in in a a renouncement renouncement of of mankind, mankind, and and who who had had generally generally completed completed their their abjuration abjuration by by marrying marrying the the baker. baker. the the room room was was as as neat neat as as janet janet or or my my aunt. aunt. as as i i laid laid down down my my pen, pen, a a moment moment since, since, to to think think of of it, it, the the air air from from the the sea sea came came blowing blowing in in again, again, mixed mixed with with the the perfume perfume of of the the flowers; flowers; and and i i saw saw the the old-fashioned old-fashioned furniture furniture brightly brightly rubbed rubbed and and polished, polished, my my aunt's aunt's inviolable inviolable chair chair and and table table by by the the round round green green fan fan in in the the bow-window, bow-window, the the drugget-covered drugget-covered carpet, carpet, the the cat, cat, the the kettle-holder, kettle-holder, the the two two canaries, canaries, the the old old china, china, the the punchbowl punchbowl full full of of dried dried rose-leaves, rose-leaves, the the tall tall press press guarding guarding all all sorts sorts of of bottles bottles and and pots, pots, and, and, wonderfully wonderfully out out of of keeping keeping with with the the rest, rest, my my dusty dusty self self upon upon the the sofa, sofa, taking taking note note of of everything. everything. janet janet had had gone gone away away to to get get the the bath bath ready, ready, when when my my aunt, aunt, to to my my great great alarm, alarm, became became in in one one moment moment rigid rigid with with indignation, indignation, and and had had hardly hardly voice voice to to cry cry out, out, 'janet! 'janet! donkeys!' donkeys!' upon upon which, which, janet janet came came running running up up the the stairs stairs as as if if the the house house were were in in flames, flames, darted darted out out on on a a little little piece piece of of green green in in front, front, and and warned warned off off two two saddle-donkeys, saddle-donkeys, lady-ridden, lady-ridden, that that had had presumed presumed to to set set hoof hoof upon upon it; it; while while my my aunt, aunt, rushing rushing out out of of the the house, house, seized seized the the bridle bridle of of a a third third animal animal laden laden with with a a bestriding bestriding child, child, turned turned him, him, led led him him forth forth from from those those sacred sacred precincts, precincts, and and boxed boxed the the ears ears of of the the unlucky unlucky urchin urchin in in attendance attendance who who had had dared dared to to profane profane that that hallowed hallowed ground. ground. to to this this hour hour i i don't don't know know whether whether my my aunt aunt had had any any lawful lawful right right of of way way over over that that patch patch of of green; green; but but she she had had settled settled it it in in her her own own mind mind that that she she had, had, and and it it was was all all the the same same to to her. her. the the one one great great outrage outrage of of her her life, life, demanding demanding to to be be constantly constantly avenged, avenged, was was the the passage passage of of a a donkey donkey over over that that immaculate immaculate spot. spot. in in whatever whatever occupation occupation she she was was engaged, engaged, however however interesting interesting to to her her the the conversation conversation in in which which she she was was taking taking part, part, a a donkey donkey turned turned the the current current of of her her ideas ideas in in a a moment, moment, and and she she was was upon upon him him straight. straight. jugs jugs of of water, water, and and watering-pots, watering-pots, were were kept kept in in secret secret places places ready ready to to be be discharged discharged on on the the offending offending boys; boys; sticks sticks were were laid laid in in ambush ambush behind behind the the door; door; sallies sallies were were made made at at all all hours; hours; and and incessant incessant war war prevailed. prevailed. perhaps perhaps this this was was an an agreeable agreeable excitement excitement to to the the donkey-boys; donkey-boys; or or perhaps perhaps the the more more sagacious sagacious of of the the donkeys, donkeys, understanding understanding how how the the case case stood, stood, delighted delighted with with constitutional constitutional obstinacy obstinacy in in coming coming that that way. way. i i only only know know that that there there were were three three alarms alarms before before the the bath bath was was ready; ready; and and that that on on the the occasion occasion of of the the last last and and most most desperate desperate of of all, all, i i saw saw my my aunt aunt engage, engage, single-handed, single-handed, with with a a sandy-headed sandy-headed lad lad of of fifteen, fifteen, and and bump bump his his sandy sandy head head against against her her own own gate, gate, before before he he seemed seemed to to comprehend comprehend what what was was the the matter. matter. these these interruptions interruptions were were of of the the more more ridiculous ridiculous to to me, me, because because she she was was giving giving me me broth broth out out of of a a table-spoon table-spoon at at the the time time (having (having firmly firmly persuaded persuaded herself herself that that i i was was actually actually starving, starving, and and must must receive receive nourishment nourishment at at first first in in very very small small quantities), quantities), and, and, while while my my mouth mouth was was yet yet open open to to receive receive the the spoon, spoon, she she would would put put it it back back into into the the basin, basin, cry cry 'janet! 'janet! donkeys!' donkeys!' and and go go out out to to the the assault. assault. the the bath bath was was a a great great comfort. comfort. for for i i began began to to be be sensible sensible of of acute acute pains pains in in my my limbs limbs from from lying lying out out in in the the fields, fields, and and was was now now so so tired tired and and low low that that i i could could hardly hardly keep keep myself myself awake awake for for five five minutes minutes together. together. when when i i had had bathed, bathed, they they (i (i mean mean my my aunt aunt and and janet) janet) enrobed enrobed me me in in a a shirt shirt and and a a pair pair of of trousers trousers belonging belonging to to mr. mr. dick, dick, and and tied tied me me up up in in two two or or three three great great shawls. shawls. what what sort sort of of bundle bundle i i looked looked like, like, i i don't don't know, know, but but i i felt felt a a very very hot hot one. one. feeling feeling also also very very faint faint and and drowsy, drowsy, i i soon soon lay lay down down on on the the sofa sofa again again and and fell fell asleep. asleep. it it might might have have been been a a dream, dream, originating originating in in the the fancy fancy which which had had occupied occupied my my mind mind so so long, long, but but i i awoke awoke with with the the impression impression that that my my aunt aunt had had come come and and bent bent over over me, me, and and had had put put my my hair hair away away from from my my face, face, and and laid laid my my head head more more comfortably, comfortably, and and had had then then stood stood looking looking at at me. me. the the words, words, 'pretty 'pretty fellow,' fellow,' or or 'poor 'poor fellow,' fellow,' seemed seemed to to be be in in my my ears, ears, too; too; but but certainly certainly there there was was nothing nothing else, else, when when i i awoke, awoke, to to lead lead me me to to believe believe that that they they had had been been uttered uttered by by my my aunt, aunt, who who sat sat in in the the bow-window bow-window gazing gazing at at the the sea sea from from behind behind the the green green fan, fan, which which was was mounted mounted on on a a kind kind of of swivel, swivel, and and turned turned any any way. way. we we dined dined soon soon after after i i awoke, awoke, off off a a roast roast fowl fowl and and a a pudding; pudding; i i sitting sitting at at table, table, not not unlike unlike a a trussed trussed bird bird myself, myself, and and moving moving my my arms arms with with considerable considerable difficulty. difficulty. but but as as my my aunt aunt had had swathed swathed me me up, up, i i made made no no complaint complaint of of being being inconvenienced. inconvenienced. all all this this time time i i was was deeply deeply anxious anxious to to know know what what she she was was going going to to do do with with me; me; but but she she took took her her dinner dinner in in profound profound silence, silence, except except when when she she occasionally occasionally fixed fixed her her eyes eyes on on me me sitting sitting opposite, opposite, and and said, said, 'mercy 'mercy upon upon us!' us!' which which did did not not by by any any means means relieve relieve my my anxiety. anxiety. the the cloth cloth being being drawn, drawn, and and some some sherry sherry put put upon upon the the table table (of (of which which i i had had a a glass), glass), my my aunt aunt sent sent up up for for mr. mr. dick dick again, again, who who joined joined us, us, and and looked looked as as wise wise as as he he could could when when she she requested requested him him to to attend attend to to my my story, story, which which she she elicited elicited from from me, me, gradually, gradually, by by a a course course of of questions. questions. during during my my recital, recital, she she kept kept her her eyes eyes on on mr. mr. dick, dick, who who i i thought thought would would have have gone gone to to sleep sleep but but for for that, that, and and who, who, whensoever whensoever he he lapsed lapsed into into a a smile, smile, was was checked checked by by a a frown frown from from my my aunt. aunt. 'whatever 'whatever possessed possessed that that poor poor unfortunate unfortunate baby, baby, that that she she must must go go and and be be married married again,' again,' said said my my aunt, aunt, when when i i had had finished, finished, 'i 'i can't can't conceive.' conceive.' 'perhaps 'perhaps she she fell fell in in love love with with her her second second husband,' husband,' mr. mr. dick dick suggested. suggested. 'fell 'fell in in love!' love!' repeated repeated my my aunt. aunt. 'what 'what do do you mean? mean? what what business business had had she she to to do do it?' it?' 'perhaps,' 'perhaps,' mr. mr. dick dick simpered, simpered, after after thinking thinking a a little, little, 'she 'she did did it it for for pleasure.' pleasure.' 'pleasure, 'pleasure, indeed!' indeed!' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. 'a 'a mighty mighty pleasure pleasure for for the the poor poor baby baby to to fix fix her her simple simple faith faith upon upon any any dog dog of of a a fellow, fellow, certain certain to to ill-use ill-use her her in in some some way way or or other. other. what what did did she she propose propose to to herself, herself, i i should should like like to to know! know! she she had had had had one one husband. husband. she she had had seen seen david david copperfield copperfield out out of of the the world, world, who who was was always always running running after after wax wax dolls dolls from from his his cradle. cradle. she she had had got got a a baby baby -- -- oh, oh, there there were were a a pair pair of of babies babies when when she she gave gave birth birth to to this this child child sitting sitting here, here, that that friday friday night! night! -- -- and and what what more more did did she she want?' want?' mr. mr. dick dick secretly secretly shook shook his his head head at at me, me, as as if if he he thought thought there there was was no no getting getting over over this. this. 'she 'she couldn't couldn't even even have have a a baby baby like like anybody anybody else,' else,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'where 'where was was this this child's child's sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood? trotwood? not not forthcoming. forthcoming. don't don't tell tell me!' me!' mr. mr. dick dick seemed seemed quite quite frightened. frightened. 'that 'that little little man man of of a a doctor, doctor, with with his his head head on on one one side,' side,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'jellips, 'jellips, or or whatever whatever his his name name was, was, what what was was he he about? about? all all he he could could do, do, was was to to say say to to me, me, like like a a robin robin redbreast redbreast -- -- as as he he is is -- -- "it's "it's a a boy." boy." a a boy! boy! yah, yah, the the imbecility imbecility of of the the whole whole set set of of 'em!' 'em!' the the heartiness heartiness of of the the ejaculation ejaculation startled startled mr. mr. dick dick exceedingly; exceedingly; and and me, me, too, too, if if i i am am to to tell tell the the truth. truth. 'and 'and then, then, as as if if this this was was not not enough, enough, and and she she had had not not stood stood sufficiently sufficiently in in the the light light of of this this child's child's sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood,' trotwood,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'she 'she marries marries a a second second time time -- -- goes goes and and marries marries a a murderer murderer -- -- or or a a man man with with a a name name like like it it -- -- and and stands stands in in this this child's child's light! light! and and the the natural natural consequence consequence is, is, as as anybody anybody but but a a baby baby might might have have foreseen, foreseen, that that he he prowls prowls and and wanders. wanders. he's he's as as like like cain cain before before he he was was grown grown up, up, as as he he can can be.' be.' mr. mr. dick dick looked looked hard hard at at me, me, as as if if to to identify identify me me in in this this character. character. 'and 'and then then there's there's that that woman woman with with the the pagan pagan name,' name,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'that 'that peggotty, peggotty, she she goes goes and and gets gets married married next. next. because because she she has has not not seen seen enough enough of of the the evil evil attending attending such such things, things, she she goes goes and and gets gets married married next, next, as as the the child child relates. relates. i i only only hope,' hope,' said said my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her head, head, 'that 'that her her husband husband is is one one of of those those poker poker husbands husbands who who abound abound in in the the newspapers, newspapers, and and will will beat beat her her well well with with one.' one.' i i could could not not bear bear to to hear hear my my old old nurse nurse so so decried, decried, and and made made the the subject subject of of such such a a wish. wish. i i told told my my aunt aunt that that indeed indeed she she was was mistaken. mistaken. that that peggotty peggotty was was the the best, best, the the truest, truest, the the most most faithful, faithful, most most devoted, devoted, and and most most self-denying self-denying friend friend and and servant servant in in the the world; world; who who had had ever ever loved loved me me dearly, dearly, who who had had ever ever loved loved my my mother mother dearly; dearly; who who had had held held my my mother's mother's dying dying head head upon upon her her arm, arm, on on whose whose face face my my mother mother had had imprinted imprinted her her last last grateful grateful kiss. kiss. and and my my remembrance remembrance of of them them both, both, choking choking me, me, i i broke broke down down as as i i was was trying trying to to say say that that her her home home was was my my home, home, and and that that all all she she had had was was mine, mine, and and that that i i would would have have gone gone to to her her for for shelter, shelter, but but for for her her humble humble station, station, which which made made me me fear fear that that i i might might bring bring some some trouble trouble on on her her -- -- i i broke broke down, down, i i say, say, as as i i was was trying trying to to say say so, so, and and laid laid my my face face in in my my hands hands upon upon the the table. table. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'the 'the child child is is right right to to stand stand by by those those who who have have stood stood by by him him -- -- janet! janet! donkeys!' donkeys!' i i thoroughly thoroughly believe believe that that but but for for those those unfortunate unfortunate donkeys, donkeys, we we should should have have come come to to a a good good understanding; understanding; for for my my aunt aunt had had laid laid her her hand hand on on my my shoulder, shoulder, and and the the impulse impulse was was upon upon me, me, thus thus emboldened, emboldened, to to embrace embrace her her and and beseech beseech her her protection. protection. but but the the interruption, interruption, and and the the disorder disorder she she was was thrown thrown into into by by the the struggle struggle outside, outside, put put an an end end to to all all softer softer ideas ideas for for the the present, present, and and kept kept my my aunt aunt indignantly indignantly declaiming declaiming to to mr. mr. dick dick about about her her determination determination to to appeal appeal for for redress redress to to the the laws laws of of her her country, country, and and to to bring bring actions actions for for trespass trespass against against the the whole whole donkey donkey proprietorship proprietorship of of dover, dover, until until tea-time. tea-time. after after tea, tea, we we sat sat at at the the window window -- -- on on the the look-out, look-out, as as i i imagined, imagined, from from my my aunt's aunt's sharp sharp expression expression of of face, face, for for more more invaders invaders -- -- until until dusk, dusk, when when janet janet set set candles, candles, and and a a backgammon-board, backgammon-board, on on the the table, table, and and pulled pulled down down the the blinds. blinds. 'now, 'now, mr. mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with her her grave grave look, look, and and her her forefinger forefinger up up as as before, before, 'i 'i am am going going to to ask ask you another another question. question. look look at at this this child.' child.' 'david's 'david's son?' son?' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with an an attentive, attentive, puzzled puzzled face. face. 'exactly 'exactly so,' so,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'what 'what would would you do do with with him, him, now?' now?' 'do 'do with with david's david's son?' son?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'ay,' 'ay,' replied replied my my aunt, aunt, 'with 'with david's david's son.' son.' 'oh!' 'oh!' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'yes. 'yes. do do with with -- -- i i should should put put him him to to bed.' bed.' 'janet!' 'janet!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, with with the the same same complacent complacent triumph triumph that that i i had had remarked remarked before. before. 'mr. 'mr. dick dick sets sets us us all all right. right. if if the the bed bed is is ready, ready, we'll we'll take take him him up up to to it.' it.' janet janet reporting reporting it it to to be be quite quite ready, ready, i i was was taken taken up up to to it; it; kindly, kindly, but but in in some some sort sort like like a a prisoner; prisoner; my my aunt aunt going going in in front front and and janet janet bringing bringing up up the the rear. rear. the the only only circumstance circumstance which which gave gave me me any any new new hope, hope, was was my my aunt's aunt's stopping stopping on on the the stairs stairs to to inquire inquire about about a a smell smell of of fire fire that that was was prevalent prevalent there; there; and and janet's janet's replying replying that that she she had had been been making making tinder tinder down down in in the the kitchen, kitchen, of of my my old old shirt. shirt. but but there there were were no no other other clothes clothes in in my my room room than than the the odd odd heap heap of of things things i i wore; wore; and and when when i i was was left left there, there, with with a a little little taper taper which which my my aunt aunt forewarned forewarned me me would would burn burn exactly exactly five five minutes, minutes, i i heard heard them them lock lock my my door door on on the the outside. outside. turning turning these these things things over over in in my my mind mind i i deemed deemed it it possible possible that that my my aunt, aunt, who who could could know know nothing nothing of of me, me, might might suspect suspect i i had had a a habit habit of of running running away, away, and and took took precautions, precautions, on on that that account, account, to to have have me me in in safe safe keeping. keeping. the the room room was was a a pleasant pleasant one, one, at at the the top top of of the the house, house, overlooking overlooking the the sea, sea, on on which which the the moon moon was was shining shining brilliantly. brilliantly. after after i i had had said said my my prayers, prayers, and and the the candle candle had had burnt burnt out, out, i i remember remember how how i i still still sat sat looking looking at at the the moonlight moonlight on on the the water, water, as as if if i i could could hope hope to to read read my my fortune fortune in in it, it, as as in in a a bright bright book; book; or or to to see see my my mother mother with with her her child, child, coming coming from from heaven, heaven, along along that that shining shining path, path, to to look look upon upon me me as as she she had had looked looked when when i i last last saw saw her her sweet sweet face. face. i i remember remember how how the the solemn solemn feeling feeling with with which which at at length length i i turned turned my my eyes eyes away, away, yielded yielded to to the the sensation sensation of of gratitude gratitude and and rest rest which which the the sight sight of of the the white-curtained white-curtained bed bed -- -- and and how how much much more more the the lying lying softly softly down down upon upon it, it, nestling nestling in in the the snow-white snow-white sheets! sheets! -- -- inspired. inspired. i i remember remember how how i i thought thought of of all all the the solitary solitary places places under under the the night night sky sky where where i i had had slept, slept, and and how how i i prayed prayed that that i i never never might might be be houseless houseless any any more, more, and and never never might might forget forget the the houseless. houseless. i i remember remember how how i i seemed seemed to to float, float, then, then, down down the the melancholy melancholy glory glory of of that that track track upon upon the the sea, sea, away away into into the the world world of of dreams. dreams. chapter chapter 14. 14. my my aunt aunt makes makes up up her her mind mind about about me me on on going going down down in in the the morning, morning, i i found found my my aunt aunt musing musing so so profoundly profoundly over over the the breakfast breakfast table, table, with with her her elbow elbow on on the the tray, tray, that that the the contents contents of of the the urn urn had had overflowed overflowed the the teapot teapot and and were were laying laying the the whole whole table-cloth table-cloth under under water, water, when when my my entrance entrance put put her her meditations meditations to to flight. flight. i i felt felt sure sure that that i i had had been been the the subject subject of of her her reflections, reflections, and and was was more more than than ever ever anxious anxious to to know know her her intentions intentions towards towards me. me. yet yet i i dared dared not not express express my my anxiety, anxiety, lest lest it it should should give give her her offence. offence. my my eyes, eyes, however, however, not not being being so so much much under under control control as as my my tongue, tongue, were were attracted attracted towards towards my my aunt aunt very very often often during during breakfast. breakfast. i i never never could could look look at at her her for for a a few few moments moments together together but but i i found found her her looking looking at at me me -- -- in in an an odd odd thoughtful thoughtful manner, manner, as as if if i i were were an an immense immense way way off, off, instead instead of of being being on on the the other other side side of of the the small small round round table. table. when when she she had had finished finished her her breakfast, breakfast, my my aunt aunt very very deliberately deliberately leaned leaned back back in in her her chair, chair, knitted knitted her her brows, brows, folded folded her her arms, arms, and and contemplated contemplated me me at at her her leisure, leisure, with with such such a a fixedness fixedness of of attention attention that that i i was was quite quite overpowered overpowered by by embarrassment. embarrassment. not not having having as as yet yet finished finished my my own own breakfast, breakfast, i i attempted attempted to to hide hide my my confusion confusion by by proceeding proceeding with with it; it; but but my my knife knife tumbled tumbled over over my my fork, fork, my my fork fork tripped tripped up up my my knife, knife, i i chipped chipped bits bits of of bacon bacon a a surprising surprising height height into into the the air air instead instead of of cutting cutting them them for for my my own own eating, eating, and and choked choked myself myself with with my my tea, tea, which which persisted persisted in in going going the the wrong wrong way way instead instead of of the the right right one, one, until until i i gave gave in in altogether, altogether, and and sat sat blushing blushing under under my my aunt's aunt's close close scrutiny. scrutiny. 'hallo!' 'hallo!' said said my my aunt, aunt, after after a a long long time. time. i i looked looked up, up, and and met met her her sharp sharp bright bright glance glance respectfully. respectfully. 'i 'i have have written written to to him,' him,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'to 'to -- -- ?' ?' 'to 'to your your father-in-law,' father-in-law,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i have have sent sent him him a a letter letter that that i'll i'll trouble trouble him him to to attend attend to, to, or or he he and and i i will will fall fall out, out, i i can can tell tell him!' him!' 'does 'does he he know know where where i i am, am, aunt?' aunt?' i i inquired, inquired, alarmed. alarmed. 'i 'i have have told told him,' him,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a nod. nod. 'shall 'shall i i -- -- be be -- -- given given up up to to him?' him?' i i faltered. faltered. 'i 'i don't don't know,' know,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'we 'we shall shall see.' see.' 'oh! 'oh! i i can't can't think think what what i i shall shall do,' do,' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, 'if 'if i i have have to to go go back back to to mr. mr. murdstone!' murdstone!' 'i 'i don't don't know know anything anything about about it,' it,' said said my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her head. head. 'i 'i can't can't say, say, i i am am sure. sure. we we shall shall see.' see.' my my spirits spirits sank sank under under these these words, words, and and i i became became very very downcast downcast and and heavy heavy of of heart. heart. my my aunt, aunt, without without appearing appearing to to take take much much heed heed of of me, me, put put on on a a coarse coarse apron apron with with a a bib, bib, which which she she took took out out of of the the press; press; washed washed up up the the teacups teacups with with her her own own hands; hands; and, and, when when everything everything was was washed washed and and set set in in the the tray tray again, again, and and the the cloth cloth folded folded and and put put on on the the top top of of the the whole, whole, rang rang for for janet janet to to remove remove it. it. she she next next swept swept up up the the crumbs crumbs with with a a little little broom broom (putting (putting on on a a pair pair of of gloves gloves first), first), until until there there did did not not appear appear to to be be one one microscopic microscopic speck speck left left on on the the carpet; carpet; next next dusted dusted and and arranged arranged the the room, room, which which was was dusted dusted and and arranged arranged to to a a hair's hair's breadth breadth already. already. when when all all these these tasks tasks were were performed performed to to her her satisfaction, satisfaction, she she took took off off the the gloves gloves and and apron, apron, folded folded them them up, up, put put them them in in the the particular particular corner corner of of the the press press from from which which they they had had been been taken, taken, brought brought out out her her work-box work-box to to her her own own table table in in the the open open window, window, and and sat sat down, down, with with the the green green fan fan between between her her and and the the light, light, to to work. work. 'i 'i wish wish you'd you'd go go upstairs,' upstairs,' said said my my aunt, aunt, as as she she threaded threaded her her needle, needle, 'and 'and give give my my compliments compliments to to mr. mr. dick, dick, and and i'll i'll be be glad glad to to know know how how he he gets gets on on with with his his memorial.' memorial.' i i rose rose with with all all alacrity, alacrity, to to acquit acquit myself myself of of this this commission. commission. 'i 'i suppose,' suppose,' said said my my aunt, aunt, eyeing eyeing me me as as narrowly narrowly as as she she had had eyed eyed the the needle needle in in threading threading it, it, 'you think think mr. mr. dick dick a a short short name, name, eh?' eh?' 'i 'i thought thought it it was was rather rather a a short short name, name, yesterday,' yesterday,' i i confessed. confessed. 'you are are not not to to suppose suppose that that he he hasn't hasn't got got a a longer longer name, name, if if he he chose chose to to use use it,' it,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a loftier loftier air. air. 'babley 'babley -- -- mr. mr. richard richard babley babley -- -- that's that's the the gentleman's gentleman's true true name.' name.' i i was was going going to to suggest, suggest, with with a a modest modest sense sense of of my my youth youth and and the the familiarity familiarity i i had had been been already already guilty guilty of, of, that that i i had had better better give give him him the the full full benefit benefit of of that that name, name, when when my my aunt aunt went went on on to to say: say: 'but 'but don't don't you call call him him by by it, it, whatever whatever you do. do. he he can't can't bear bear his his name. name. that's that's a a peculiarity peculiarity of of his. his. though though i i don't don't know know that that it's it's much much of of a a peculiarity, peculiarity, either; either; for for he he has has been been ill-used ill-used enough, enough, by by some some that that bear bear it, it, to to have have a a mortal mortal antipathy antipathy for for it, it, heaven heaven knows. knows. mr. mr. dick dick is is his his name name here, here, and and everywhere everywhere else, else, now now -- -- if if he he ever ever went went anywhere anywhere else, else, which which he he don't. don't. so so take take care, care, child, child, you don't don't call call him him anything anything but but mr. mr. dick.' dick.' i i promised promised to to obey, obey, and and went went upstairs upstairs with with my my message; message; thinking, thinking, as as i i went, went, that that if if mr. mr. dick dick had had been been working working at at his his memorial memorial long, long, at at the the same same rate rate as as i i had had seen seen him him working working at at it, it, through through the the open open door, door, when when i i came came down, down, he he was was probably probably getting getting on on very very well well indeed. indeed. i i found found him him still still driving driving at at it it with with a a long long pen, pen, and and his his head head almost almost laid laid upon upon the the paper. paper. he he was was so so intent intent upon upon it, it, that that i i had had ample ample leisure leisure to to observe observe the the large large paper paper kite kite in in a a corner, corner, the the confusion confusion of of bundles bundles of of manuscript, manuscript, the the number number of of pens, pens, and, and, above above all, all, the the quantity quantity of of ink ink (which (which he he seemed seemed to to have have in, in, in in half-gallon half-gallon jars jars by by the the dozen), dozen), before before he he observed observed my my being being present. present. 'ha! 'ha! phoebus!' phoebus!' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, laying laying down down his his pen. pen. 'how 'how does does the the world world go? go? i'll i'll tell tell you what,' what,' he he added, added, in in a a lower lower tone, tone, 'i 'i shouldn't shouldn't wish wish it it to to be be mentioned, mentioned, but but it's it's a a -- -- ' ' here here he he beckoned beckoned to to me, me, and and put put his his lips lips close close to to my my ear ear -- -- 'it's 'it's a a mad mad world. world. mad mad as as bedlam, bedlam, boy!' boy!' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, taking taking snuff snuff from from a a round round box box on on the the table, table, and and laughing laughing heartily. heartily. without without presuming presuming to to give give my my opinion opinion on on this this question, question, i i delivered delivered my my message. message. 'well,' 'well,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, in in answer, answer, 'my 'my compliments compliments to to her, her, and and i i -- -- i i believe believe i i have have made made a a start. start. i i think think i i have have made made a a start,' start,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, passing passing his his hand hand among among his his grey grey hair, hair, and and casting casting anything anything but but a a confident confident look look at at his his manuscript. manuscript. 'you have have been been to to school?' school?' 'yes, 'yes, sir,' sir,' i i answered; answered; 'for 'for a a short short time.' time.' 'do 'do you recollect recollect the the date,' date,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, looking looking earnestly earnestly at at me, me, and and taking taking up up his his pen pen to to note note it it down, down, 'when 'when king king charles charles the the first first had had his his head head cut cut off?' off?' i i said said i i believed believed it it happened happened in in the the year year sixteen sixteen hundred hundred and and forty-nine. forty-nine. 'well,' 'well,' returned returned mr. mr. dick, dick, scratching scratching his his ear ear with with his his pen, pen, and and looking looking dubiously dubiously at at me. me. 'so 'so the the books books say; say; but but i i don't don't see see how how that that can can be. be. because, because, if if it it was was so so long long ago, ago, how how could could the the people people about about him him have have made made that that mistake mistake of of putting putting some some of of the the trouble trouble out out of of his his head, head, after after it it was was taken taken off, off, into into mine?' mine?' i i was was very very much much surprised surprised by by the the inquiry; inquiry; but but could could give give no no information information on on this this point. point. 'it's 'it's very very strange,' strange,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with a a despondent despondent look look upon upon his his papers, papers, and and with with his his hand hand among among his his hair hair again, again, 'that 'that i i never never can can get get that that quite quite right. right. i i never never can can make make that that perfectly perfectly clear. clear. but but no no matter, matter, no no matter!' matter!' he he said said cheerfully, cheerfully, and and rousing rousing himself, himself, 'there's 'there's time time enough! enough! my my compliments compliments to to miss miss trotwood, trotwood, i i am am getting getting on on very very well well indeed.' indeed.' i i was was going going away, away, when when he he directed directed my my attention attention to to the the kite. kite. 'what 'what do do you think think of of that that for for a a kite?' kite?' he he said. said. i i answered answered that that it it was was a a beautiful beautiful one. one. i i should should think think it it must must have have been been as as much much as as seven seven feet feet high. high. 'i 'i made made it. it. we'll we'll go go and and fly fly it, it, you and and i,' i,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'do 'do you see see this?' this?' he he showed showed me me that that it it was was covered covered with with manuscript, manuscript, very very closely closely and and laboriously laboriously written; written; but but so so plainly, plainly, that that as as i i looked looked along along the the lines, lines, i i thought thought i i saw saw some some allusion allusion to to king king charles charles the the first's first's head head again, again, in in one one or or two two places. places. 'there's 'there's plenty plenty of of string,' string,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'and 'and when when it it flies flies high, high, it it takes takes the the facts facts a a long long way. way. that's that's my my manner manner of of diffusing diffusing 'em. 'em. i i don't don't know know where where they they may may come come down. down. it's it's according according to to circumstances, circumstances, and and the the wind, wind, and and so so forth; forth; but but i i take take my my chance chance of of that.' that.' his his face face was was so so very very mild mild and and pleasant, pleasant, and and had had something something so so reverend reverend in in it, it, though though it it was was hale hale and and hearty, hearty, that that i i was was not not sure sure but but that that he he was was having having a a good-humoured good-humoured jest jest with with me. me. so so i i laughed, laughed, and and he he laughed, laughed, and and we we parted parted the the best best friends friends possible. possible. 'well, 'well, child,' child,' said said my my aunt, aunt, when when i i went went downstairs. downstairs. 'and 'and what what of of mr. mr. dick, dick, this this morning?' morning?' i i informed informed her her that that he he sent sent his his compliments, compliments, and and was was getting getting on on very very well well indeed. indeed. 'what 'what do do you think think of of him?' him?' said said my my aunt. aunt. i i had had some some shadowy shadowy idea idea of of endeavouring endeavouring to to evade evade the the question, question, by by replying replying that that i i thought thought him him a a very very nice nice gentleman; gentleman; but but my my aunt aunt was was not not to to be be so so put put off, off, for for she she laid laid her her work work down down in in her her lap, lap, and and said, said, folding folding her her hands hands upon upon it: it: 'come! 'come! your your sister sister betsey betsey trotwood trotwood would would have have told told me me what what she she thought thought of of anyone, anyone, directly. directly. be be as as like like your your sister sister as as you can, can, and and speak speak out!' out!' 'is 'is he he -- -- is is mr. mr. dick dick -- -- i i ask ask because because i i don't don't know, know, aunt aunt -- -- is is he he at at all all out out of of his his mind, mind, then?' then?' i i stammered; stammered; for for i i felt felt i i was was on on dangerous dangerous ground. ground. 'not 'not a a morsel,' morsel,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'oh, 'oh, indeed!' indeed!' i i observed observed faintly. faintly. 'if 'if there there is is anything anything in in the the world,' world,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with great great decision decision and and force force of of manner, manner, 'that 'that mr. mr. dick dick is is not, not, it's it's that.' that.' i i had had nothing nothing better better to to offer, offer, than than another another timid, timid, 'oh, 'oh, indeed!' indeed!' 'he 'he has has been been called called mad,' mad,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i have have a a selfish selfish pleasure pleasure in in saying saying he he has has been been called called mad, mad, or or i i should should not not have have had had the the benefit benefit of of his his society society and and advice advice for for these these last last ten ten years years and and upwards upwards -- -- in in fact, fact, ever ever since since your your sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, disappointed disappointed me.' me.' 'so 'so long long as as that?' that?' i i said. said. 'and 'and nice nice people people they they were, were, who who had had the the audacity audacity to to call call him him mad,' mad,' pursued pursued my my aunt. aunt. 'mr. 'mr. dick dick is is a a sort sort of of distant distant connexion connexion of of mine mine -- -- it it doesn't doesn't matter matter how; how; i i needn't needn't enter enter into into that. that. if if it it hadn't hadn't been been for for me, me, his his own own brother brother would would have have shut shut him him up up for for life. life. that's that's all.' all.' i i am am afraid afraid it it was was hypocritical hypocritical in in me, me, but but seeing seeing that that my my aunt aunt felt felt strongly strongly on on the the subject, subject, i i tried tried to to look look as as if if i i felt felt strongly strongly too. too. 'a 'a proud proud fool!' fool!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'because 'because his his brother brother was was a a little little eccentric eccentric -- -- though though he he is is not not half half so so eccentric eccentric as as a a good good many many people people -- -- he he didn't didn't like like to to have have him him visible visible about about his his house, house, and and sent sent him him away away to to some some private private asylum-place: asylum-place: though though he he had had been been left left to to his his particular particular care care by by their their deceased deceased father, father, who who thought thought him him almost almost a a natural. natural. and and a a wise wise man man he he must must have have been been to to think think so! so! mad mad himself, himself, no no doubt.' doubt.' again, again, as as my my aunt aunt looked looked quite quite convinced, convinced, i i endeavoured endeavoured to to look look quite quite convinced convinced also. also. 'so 'so i i stepped stepped in,' in,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and made made him him an an offer. offer. i i said, said, "your "your brother's brother's sane sane -- -- a a great great deal deal more more sane sane than than you are, are, or or ever ever will will be, be, it it is is to to be be hoped. hoped. let let him him have have his his little little income, income, and and come come and and live live with with me. me. i i am am not not afraid afraid of of him, him, i i am am not not proud, proud, i i am am ready ready to to take take care care of of him, him, and and shall shall not not ill-treat ill-treat him him as as some some people people (besides (besides the the asylum-folks) asylum-folks) have have done." done." after after a a good good deal deal of of squabbling,' squabbling,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'i 'i got got him; him; and and he he has has been been here here ever ever since. since. he he is is the the most most friendly friendly and and amenable amenable creature creature in in existence; existence; and and as as for for advice! advice! -- -- but but nobody nobody knows knows what what that that man's man's mind mind is, is, except except myself.' myself.' my my aunt aunt smoothed smoothed her her dress dress and and shook shook her her head, head, as as if if she she smoothed smoothed defiance defiance of of the the whole whole world world out out of of the the one, one, and and shook shook it it out out of of the the other. other. 'he 'he had had a a favourite favourite sister,' sister,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'a 'a good good creature, creature, and and very very kind kind to to him. him. but but she she did did what what they they all all do do -- -- took took a a husband. husband. and and he he did did what what they they all all do do -- -- made made her her wretched. wretched. it it had had such such an an effect effect upon upon the the mind mind of of mr. mr. dick dick (that's (that's not not madness, madness, i i hope!) hope!) that, that, combined combined with with his his fear fear of of his his brother, brother, and and his his sense sense of of his his unkindness, unkindness, it it threw threw him him into into a a fever. fever. that that was was before before he he came came to to me, me, but but the the recollection recollection of of it it is is oppressive oppressive to to him him even even now. now. did did he he say say anything anything to to you about about king king charles charles the the first, first, child?' child?' 'yes, 'yes, aunt.' aunt.' 'ah!' 'ah!' said said my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose nose as as if if she she were were a a little little vexed. vexed. 'that's 'that's his his allegorical allegorical way way of of expressing expressing it. it. he he connects connects his his illness illness with with great great disturbance disturbance and and agitation, agitation, naturally, naturally, and and that's that's the the figure, figure, or or the the simile, simile, or or whatever whatever it's it's called, called, which which he he chooses chooses to to use. use. and and why why shouldn't shouldn't he, he, if if he he thinks thinks proper!' proper!' i i said: said: 'certainly, 'certainly, aunt.' aunt.' 'it's 'it's not not a a business-like business-like way way of of speaking,' speaking,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'nor 'nor a a worldly worldly way. way. i i am am aware aware of of that; that; and and that's that's the the reason reason why why i i insist insist upon upon it, it, that that there there shan't shan't be be a a word word about about it it in in his his memorial.' memorial.' 'is 'is it it a a memorial memorial about about his his own own history history that that he he is is writing, writing, aunt?' aunt?' 'yes, 'yes, child,' child,' said said my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose nose again. again. 'he 'he is is memorializing memorializing the the lord lord chancellor, chancellor, or or the the lord lord somebody somebody or or other other -- -- one one of of those those people, people, at at all all events, events, who who are are paid paid to to be be memorialized memorialized -- -- about about his his affairs. affairs. i i suppose suppose it it will will go go in, in, one one of of these these days. days. he he hasn't hasn't been been able able to to draw draw it it up up yet, yet, without without introducing introducing that that mode mode of of expressing expressing himself; himself; but but it it don't don't signify; signify; it it keeps keeps him him employed.' employed.' in in fact, fact, i i found found out out afterwards afterwards that that mr. mr. dick dick had had been been for for upwards upwards of of ten ten years years endeavouring endeavouring to to keep keep king king charles charles the the first first out out of of the the memorial; memorial; but but he he had had been been constantly constantly getting getting into into it, it, and and was was there there now. now. 'i 'i say say again,' again,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'nobody 'nobody knows knows what what that that man's man's mind mind is is except except myself; myself; and and he's he's the the most most amenable amenable and and friendly friendly creature creature in in existence. existence. if if he he likes likes to to fly fly a a kite kite sometimes, sometimes, what what of of that! that! franklin franklin used used to to fly fly a a kite. kite. he he was was a a quaker, quaker, or or something something of of that that sort, sort, if if i i am am not not mistaken. mistaken. and and a a quaker quaker flying flying a a kite kite is is a a much much more more ridiculous ridiculous object object than than anybody anybody else.' else.' if if i i could could have have supposed supposed that that my my aunt aunt had had recounted recounted these these particulars particulars for for my my especial especial behoof, behoof, and and as as a a piece piece of of confidence confidence in in me, me, i i should should have have felt felt very very much much distinguished, distinguished, and and should should have have augured augured favourably favourably from from such such a a mark mark of of her her good good opinion. opinion. but but i i could could hardly hardly help help observing observing that that she she had had launched launched into into them, them, chiefly chiefly because because the the question question was was raised raised in in her her own own mind, mind, and and with with very very little little reference reference to to me, me, though though she she had had addressed addressed herself herself to to me me in in the the absence absence of of anybody anybody else. else. at at the the same same time, time, i i must must say say that that the the generosity generosity of of her her championship championship of of poor poor harmless harmless mr. mr. dick, dick, not not only only inspired inspired my my young young breast breast with with some some selfish selfish hope hope for for myself, myself, but but warmed warmed it it unselfishly unselfishly towards towards her. her. i i believe believe that that i i began began to to know know that that there there was was something something about about my my aunt, aunt, notwithstanding notwithstanding her her many many eccentricities eccentricities and and odd odd humours, humours, to to be be honoured honoured and and trusted trusted in. in. though though she she was was just just as as sharp sharp that that day day as as on on the the day day before, before, and and was was in in and and out out about about the the donkeys donkeys just just as as often, often, and and was was thrown thrown into into a a tremendous tremendous state state of of indignation, indignation, when when a a young young man, man, going going by, by, ogled ogled janet janet at at a a window window (which (which was was one one of of the the gravest gravest misdemeanours misdemeanours that that could could be be committed committed against against my my aunt's aunt's dignity), dignity), she she seemed seemed to to me me to to command command more more of of my my respect, respect, if if not not less less of of my my fear. fear. the the anxiety anxiety i i underwent, underwent, in in the the interval interval which which necessarily necessarily elapsed elapsed before before a a reply reply could could be be received received to to her her letter letter to to mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, was was extreme; extreme; but but i i made made an an endeavour endeavour to to suppress suppress it, it, and and to to be be as as agreeable agreeable as as i i could could in in a a quiet quiet way, way, both both to to my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. dick. dick. the the latter latter and and i i would would have have gone gone out out to to fly fly the the great great kite; kite; but but that that i i had had still still no no other other clothes clothes than than the the anything anything but but ornamental ornamental garments garments with with which which i i had had been been decorated decorated on on the the first first day, day, and and which which confined confined me me to to the the house, house, except except for for an an hour hour after after dark, dark, when when my my aunt, aunt, for for my my health's health's sake, sake, paraded paraded me me up up and and down down on on the the cliff cliff outside, outside, before before going going to to bed. bed. at at length length the the reply reply from from mr. mr. murdstone murdstone came, came, and and my my aunt aunt informed informed me, me, to to my my infinite infinite terror, terror, that that he he was was coming coming to to speak speak to to her her herself herself on on the the next next day. day. on on the the next next day, day, still still bundled bundled up up in in my my curious curious habiliments, habiliments, i i sat sat counting counting the the time, time, flushed flushed and and heated heated by by the the conflict conflict of of sinking sinking hopes hopes and and rising rising fears fears within within me; me; and and waiting waiting to to be be startled startled by by the the sight sight of of the the gloomy gloomy face, face, whose whose non-arrival non-arrival startled startled me me every every minute. minute. my my aunt aunt was was a a little little more more imperious imperious and and stern stern than than usual, usual, but but i i observed observed no no other other token token of of her her preparing preparing herself herself to to receive receive the the visitor visitor so so much much dreaded dreaded by by me. me. she she sat sat at at work work in in the the window, window, and and i i sat sat by, by, with with my my thoughts thoughts running running astray astray on on all all possible possible and and impossible impossible results results of of mr. mr. murdstone's murdstone's visit, visit, until until pretty pretty late late in in the the afternoon. afternoon. our our dinner dinner had had been been indefinitely indefinitely postponed; postponed; but but it it was was growing growing so so late, late, that that my my aunt aunt had had ordered ordered it it to to be be got got ready, ready, when when she she gave gave a a sudden sudden alarm alarm of of donkeys, donkeys, and and to to my my consternation consternation and and amazement, amazement, i i beheld beheld miss miss murdstone, murdstone, on on a a side-saddle, side-saddle, ride ride deliberately deliberately over over the the sacred sacred piece piece of of green, green, and and stop stop in in front front of of the the house, house, looking looking about about her. her. 'go 'go along along with with you!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her head head and and her her fist fist at at the the window. window. 'you have have no no business business there. there. how how dare dare you trespass? trespass? go go along! along! oh! oh! you bold-faced bold-faced thing!' thing!' my my aunt aunt was was so so exasperated exasperated by by the the coolness coolness with with which which miss miss murdstone murdstone looked looked about about her, her, that that i i really really believe believe she she was was motionless, motionless, and and unable unable for for the the moment moment to to dart dart out out according according to to custom. custom. i i seized seized the the opportunity opportunity to to inform inform her her who who it it was; was; and and that that the the gentleman gentleman now now coming coming near near the the offender offender (for (for the the way way up up was was very very steep, steep, and and he he had had dropped dropped behind), behind), was was mr. mr. murdstone murdstone himself. himself. 'i 'i don't don't care care who who it it is!' is!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, still still shaking shaking her her head head and and gesticulating gesticulating anything anything but but welcome welcome from from the the bow-window. bow-window. 'i 'i won't won't be be trespassed trespassed upon. upon. i i won't won't allow allow it. it. go go away! away! janet, janet, turn turn him him round. round. lead lead him him off!' off!' and and i i saw, saw, from from behind behind my my aunt, aunt, a a sort sort of of hurried hurried battle-piece, battle-piece, in in which which the the donkey donkey stood stood resisting resisting everybody, everybody, with with all all his his four four legs legs planted planted different different ways, ways, while while janet janet tried tried to to pull pull him him round round by by the the bridle, bridle, mr. mr. murdstone murdstone tried tried to to lead lead him him on, on, miss miss murdstone murdstone struck struck at at janet janet with with a a parasol, parasol, and and several several boys, boys, who who had had come come to to see see the the engagement, engagement, shouted shouted vigorously. vigorously. but but my my aunt, aunt, suddenly suddenly descrying descrying among among them them the the young young malefactor malefactor who who was was the the donkey's donkey's guardian, guardian, and and who who was was one one of of the the most most inveterate inveterate offenders offenders against against her, her, though though hardly hardly in in his his teens, teens, rushed rushed out out to to the the scene scene of of action, action, pounced pounced upon upon him, him, captured captured him, him, dragged dragged him, him, with with his his jacket jacket over over his his head, head, and and his his heels heels grinding grinding the the ground, ground, into into the the garden, garden, and, and, calling calling upon upon janet janet to to fetch fetch the the constables constables and and justices, justices, that that he he might might be be taken, taken, tried, tried, and and executed executed on on the the spot, spot, held held him him at at bay bay there. there. this this part part of of the the business, business, however, however, did did not not last last long; long; for for the the young young rascal, rascal, being being expert expert at at a a variety variety of of feints feints and and dodges, dodges, of of which which my my aunt aunt had had no no conception, conception, soon soon went went whooping whooping away, away, leaving leaving some some deep deep impressions impressions of of his his nailed nailed boots boots in in the the flower-beds, flower-beds, and and taking taking his his donkey donkey in in triumph triumph with with him. him. miss miss murdstone, murdstone, during during the the latter latter portion portion of of the the contest, contest, had had dismounted, dismounted, and and was was now now waiting waiting with with her her brother brother at at the the bottom bottom of of the the steps, steps, until until my my aunt aunt should should be be at at leisure leisure to to receive receive them. them. my my aunt, aunt, a a little little ruffled ruffled by by the the combat, combat, marched marched past past them them into into the the house, house, with with great great dignity, dignity, and and took took no no notice notice of of their their presence, presence, until until they they were were announced announced by by janet. janet. 'shall 'shall i i go go away, away, aunt?' aunt?' i i asked, asked, trembling. trembling. 'no, 'no, sir,' sir,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'certainly 'certainly not!' not!' with with which which she she pushed pushed me me into into a a corner corner near near her, her, and and fenced fenced me me in in with with a a chair, chair, as as if if it it were were a a prison prison or or a a bar bar of of justice. justice. this this position position i i continued continued to to occupy occupy during during the the whole whole interview, interview, and and from from it it i i now now saw saw mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone enter enter the the room. room. 'oh!' 'oh!' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'i 'i was was not not aware aware at at first first to to whom whom i i had had the the pleasure pleasure of of objecting. objecting. but but i i don't don't allow allow anybody anybody to to ride ride over over that that turf. turf. i i make make no no exceptions. exceptions. i i don't don't allow allow anybody anybody to to do do it.' it.' 'your 'your regulation regulation is is rather rather awkward awkward to to strangers,' strangers,' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'is 'is it!' it!' said said my my aunt. aunt. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone seemed seemed afraid afraid of of a a renewal renewal of of hostilities, hostilities, and and interposing interposing began: began: 'miss 'miss trotwood!' trotwood!' 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon,' pardon,' observed observed my my aunt aunt with with a a keen keen look. look. 'you are are the the mr. mr. murdstone murdstone who who married married the the widow widow of of my my late late nephew, nephew, david david copperfield, copperfield, of of blunderstone blunderstone rookery! rookery! -- -- though though why why rookery, rookery, i i don't don't know!' know!' 'i 'i am,' am,' said said mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'you'll 'you'll excuse excuse my my saying, saying, sir,' sir,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'that 'that i i think think it it would would have have been been a a much much better better and and happier happier thing thing if if you had had left left that that poor poor child child alone.' alone.' 'i 'i so so far far agree agree with with what what miss miss trotwood trotwood has has remarked,' remarked,' observed observed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, bridling, bridling, 'that 'that i i consider consider our our lamented lamented clara clara to to have have been, been, in in all all essential essential respects, respects, a a mere mere child.' child.' 'it 'it is is a a comfort comfort to to you and and me, me, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'who 'who are are getting getting on on in in life, life, and and are are not not likely likely to to be be made made unhappy unhappy by by our our personal personal attractions, attractions, that that nobody nobody can can say say the the same same of of us.' us.' 'no 'no doubt!' doubt!' returned returned miss miss murdstone, murdstone, though, though, i i thought, thought, not not with with a a very very ready ready or or gracious gracious assent. assent. 'and 'and it it certainly certainly might might have have been, been, as as you say, say, a a better better and and happier happier thing thing for for my my brother brother if if he he had had never never entered entered into into such such a a marriage. marriage. i i have have always always been been of of that that opinion.' opinion.' 'i 'i have have no no doubt doubt you have,' have,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'janet,' 'janet,' ringing ringing the the bell, bell, 'my 'my compliments compliments to to mr. mr. dick, dick, and and beg beg him him to to come come down.' down.' until until he he came, came, my my aunt aunt sat sat perfectly perfectly upright upright and and stiff, stiff, frowning frowning at at the the wall. wall. when when he he came, came, my my aunt aunt performed performed the the ceremony ceremony of of introduction. introduction. 'mr. 'mr. dick. dick. an an old old and and intimate intimate friend. friend. on on whose whose judgement,' judgement,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with emphasis, emphasis, as as an an admonition admonition to to mr. mr. dick, dick, who who was was biting biting his his forefinger forefinger and and looking looking rather rather foolish, foolish, 'i 'i rely.' rely.' mr. mr. dick dick took took his his finger finger out out of of his his mouth, mouth, on on this this hint, hint, and and stood stood among among the the group, group, with with a a grave grave and and attentive attentive expression expression of of face. face. my my aunt aunt inclined inclined her her head head to to mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, who who went went on: on: 'miss 'miss trotwood: trotwood: on on the the receipt receipt of of your your letter, letter, i i considered considered it it an an act act of of greater greater justice justice to to myself, myself, and and perhaps perhaps of of more more respect respect to to you -- -- ' ' 'thank 'thank you,' said said my my aunt, aunt, still still eyeing eyeing him him keenly. keenly. 'you needn't needn't mind mind me.' me.' 'to 'to answer answer it it in in person, person, however however inconvenient inconvenient the the journey,' journey,' pursued pursued mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'rather 'rather than than by by letter. letter. this this unhappy unhappy boy boy who who has has run run away away from from his his friends friends and and his his occupation occupation -- -- ' ' 'and 'and whose whose appearance,' appearance,' interposed interposed his his sister, sister, directing directing general general attention attention to to me me in in my my indefinable indefinable costume, costume, 'is 'is perfectly perfectly scandalous scandalous and and disgraceful.' disgraceful.' 'jane 'jane murdstone,' murdstone,' said said her her brother, brother, 'have 'have the the goodness goodness not not to to interrupt interrupt me. me. this this unhappy unhappy boy, boy, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, has has been been the the occasion occasion of of much much domestic domestic trouble trouble and and uneasiness; uneasiness; both both during during the the lifetime lifetime of of my my late late dear dear wife, wife, and and since. since. he he has has a a sullen, sullen, rebellious rebellious spirit; spirit; a a violent violent temper; temper; and and an an untoward, untoward, intractable intractable disposition. disposition. both both my my sister sister and and myself myself have have endeavoured endeavoured to to correct correct his his vices, vices, but but ineffectually. ineffectually. and and i i have have felt felt -- -- we we both both have have felt, felt, i i may may say; say; my my sister sister being being fully fully in in my my confidence confidence -- -- that that it it is is right right you should should receive receive this this grave grave and and dispassionate dispassionate assurance assurance from from our our lips.' lips.' 'it 'it can can hardly hardly be be necessary necessary for for me me to to confirm confirm anything anything stated stated by by my my brother,' brother,' said said miss miss murdstone; murdstone; 'but 'but i i beg beg to to observe, observe, that, that, of of all all the the boys boys in in the the world, world, i i believe believe this this is is the the worst worst boy.' boy.' 'strong!' 'strong!' said said my my aunt, aunt, shortly. shortly. 'but 'but not not at at all all too too strong strong for for the the facts,' facts,' returned returned miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'ha!' 'ha!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'well, 'well, sir?' sir?' 'i 'i have have my my own own opinions,' opinions,' resumed resumed mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, whose whose face face darkened darkened more more and and more, more, the the more more he he and and my my aunt aunt observed observed each each other, other, which which they they did did very very narrowly, narrowly, 'as 'as to to the the best best mode mode of of bringing bringing him him up; up; they they are are founded, founded, in in part, part, on on my my knowledge knowledge of of him, him, and and in in part part on on my my knowledge knowledge of of my my own own means means and and resources. resources. i i am am responsible responsible for for them them to to myself, myself, i i act act upon upon them, them, and and i i say say no no more more about about them. them. it it is is enough enough that that i i place place this this boy boy under under the the eye eye of of a a friend friend of of my my own, own, in in a a respectable respectable business; business; that that it it does does not not please please him; him; that that he he runs runs away away from from it; it; makes makes himself himself a a common common vagabond vagabond about about the the country; country; and and comes comes here, here, in in rags, rags, to to appeal appeal to to you, miss miss trotwood. trotwood. i i wish wish to to set set before before you, honourably, honourably, the the exact exact consequences consequences -- -- so so far far as as they they are are within within my my knowledge knowledge -- -- of of your your abetting abetting him him in in this this appeal.' appeal.' 'but 'but about about the the respectable respectable business business first,' first,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'if 'if he he had had been been your your own own boy, boy, you would would have have put put him him to to it, it, just just the the same, same, i i suppose?' suppose?' 'if 'if he he had had been been my my brother's brother's own own boy,' boy,' returned returned miss miss murdstone, murdstone, striking striking in, in, 'his 'his character, character, i i trust, trust, would would have have been been altogether altogether different.' different.' 'or 'or if if the the poor poor child, child, his his mother, mother, had had been been alive, alive, he he would would still still have have gone gone into into the the respectable respectable business, business, would would he?' he?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i believe,' believe,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, with with an an inclination inclination of of his his head, head, 'that 'that clara clara would would have have disputed disputed nothing nothing which which myself myself and and my my sister sister jane jane murdstone murdstone were were agreed agreed was was for for the the best.' best.' miss miss murdstone murdstone confirmed confirmed this this with with an an audible audible murmur. murmur. 'humph!' 'humph!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'unfortunate 'unfortunate baby!' baby!' mr. mr. dick, dick, who who had had been been rattling rattling his his money money all all this this time, time, was was rattling rattling it it so so loudly loudly now, now, that that my my aunt aunt felt felt it it necessary necessary to to check check him him with with a a look, look, before before saying: saying: 'the 'the poor poor child's child's annuity annuity died died with with her?' her?' 'died 'died with with her,' her,' replied replied mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. 'and 'and there there was was no no settlement settlement of of the the little little property property -- -- the the house house and and garden garden -- -- the the what's-its-name what's-its-name rookery rookery without without any any rooks rooks in in it it -- -- upon upon her her boy?' boy?' 'it 'it had had been been left left to to her, her, unconditionally, unconditionally, by by her her first first husband,' husband,' mr. mr. murdstone murdstone began, began, when when my my aunt aunt caught caught him him up up with with the the greatest greatest irascibility irascibility and and impatience. impatience. 'good 'good lord, lord, man, man, there's there's no no occasion occasion to to say say that. that. left left to to her her unconditionally! unconditionally! i i think think i i see see david david copperfield copperfield looking looking forward forward to to any any condition condition of of any any sort sort or or kind, kind, though though it it stared stared him him point-blank point-blank in in the the face! face! of of course course it it was was left left to to her her unconditionally. unconditionally. but but when when she she married married again again -- -- when when she she took took that that most most disastrous disastrous step step of of marrying marrying you, in in short,' short,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'to 'to be be plain plain -- -- did did no no one one put put in in a a word word for for the the boy boy at at that that time?' time?' 'my 'my late late wife wife loved loved her her second second husband, husband, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, 'and 'and trusted trusted implicitly implicitly in in him.' him.' 'your 'your late late wife, wife, sir, sir, was was a a most most unworldly, unworldly, most most unhappy, unhappy, most most unfortunate unfortunate baby,' baby,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her head head at at him. him. 'that's 'that's what what she she was. was. and and now, now, what what have have you got got to to say say next?' next?' 'merely 'merely this, this, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i am am here here to to take take david david back back -- -- to to take take him him back back unconditionally, unconditionally, to to dispose dispose of of him him as as i i think think proper, proper, and and to to deal deal with with him him as as i i think think right. right. i i am am not not here here to to make make any any promise, promise, or or give give any any pledge pledge to to anybody. anybody. you may may possibly possibly have have some some idea, idea, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, of of abetting abetting him him in in his his running running away, away, and and in in his his complaints complaints to to you. your your manner, manner, which which i i must must say say does does not not seem seem intended intended to to propitiate, propitiate, induces induces me me to to think think it it possible. possible. now now i i must must caution caution you that that if if you abet abet him him once, once, you abet abet him him for for good good and and all; all; if if you step step in in between between him him and and me, me, now, now, you must must step step in, in, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, for for ever. ever. i i cannot cannot trifle, trifle, or or be be trifled trifled with. with. i i am am here, here, for for the the first first and and last last time, time, to to take take him him away. away. is is he he ready ready to to go? go? if if he he is is not not -- -- and and you tell tell me me he he is is not; not; on on any any pretence; pretence; it it is is indifferent indifferent to to me me what what -- -- my my doors doors are are shut shut against against him him henceforth, henceforth, and and yours, yours, i i take take it it for for granted, granted, are are open open to to him.' him.' to to this this address, address, my my aunt aunt had had listened listened with with the the closest closest attention, attention, sitting sitting perfectly perfectly upright, upright, with with her her hands hands folded folded on on one one knee, knee, and and looking looking grimly grimly on on the the speaker. speaker. when when he he had had finished, finished, she she turned turned her her eyes eyes so so as as to to command command miss miss murdstone, murdstone, without without otherwise otherwise disturbing disturbing her her attitude, attitude, and and said: said: 'well, 'well, ma'am, ma'am, have have you got got anything anything to to remark?' remark?' 'indeed, 'indeed, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'all 'all that that i i could could say say has has been been so so well well said said by by my my brother, brother, and and all all that that i i know know to to be be the the fact fact has has been been so so plainly plainly stated stated by by him, him, that that i i have have nothing nothing to to add add except except my my thanks thanks for for your your politeness. politeness. for for your your very very great great politeness, politeness, i i am am sure,' sure,' said said miss miss murdstone; murdstone; with with an an irony irony which which no no more more affected affected my my aunt, aunt, than than it it discomposed discomposed the the cannon cannon i i had had slept slept by by at at chatham. chatham. 'and 'and what what does does the the boy boy say?' say?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'are 'are you ready ready to to go, go, david?' david?' i i answered answered no, no, and and entreated entreated her her not not to to let let me me go. go. i i said said that that neither neither mr. mr. nor nor miss miss murdstone murdstone had had ever ever liked liked me, me, or or had had ever ever been been kind kind to to me. me. that that they they had had made made my my mama, mama, who who always always loved loved me me dearly, dearly, unhappy unhappy about about me, me, and and that that i i knew knew it it well, well, and and that that peggotty peggotty knew knew it. it. i i said said that that i i had had been been more more miserable miserable than than i i thought thought anybody anybody could could believe, believe, who who only only knew knew how how young young i i was. was. and and i i begged begged and and prayed prayed my my aunt aunt -- -- i i forget forget in in what what terms terms now, now, but but i i remember remember that that they they affected affected me me very very much much then then -- -- to to befriend befriend and and protect protect me, me, for for my my father's father's sake. sake. 'mr. 'mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'what 'what shall shall i i do do with with this this child?' child?' mr. mr. dick dick considered, considered, hesitated, hesitated, brightened, brightened, and and rejoined, rejoined, 'have 'have him him measured measured for for a a suit suit of of clothes clothes directly.' directly.' 'mr. 'mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt aunt triumphantly, triumphantly, 'give 'give me me your your hand, hand, for for your your common common sense sense is is invaluable.' invaluable.' having having shaken shaken it it with with great great cordiality, cordiality, she she pulled pulled me me towards towards her her and and said said to to mr. mr. murdstone: murdstone: 'you can can go go when when you like; like; i'll i'll take take my my chance chance with with the the boy. boy. if if he's he's all all you say say he he is, is, at at least least i i can can do do as as much much for for him him then, then, as as you have have done. done. but but i i don't don't believe believe a a word word of of it.' it.' 'miss 'miss trotwood,' trotwood,' rejoined rejoined mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, shrugging shrugging his his shoulders, shoulders, as as he he rose, rose, 'if 'if you were were a a gentleman gentleman -- -- ' ' 'bah! 'bah! stuff stuff and and nonsense!' nonsense!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'don't 'don't talk talk to to me!' me!' 'how 'how exquisitely exquisitely polite!' polite!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, rising. rising. 'overpowering, 'overpowering, really!' really!' 'do 'do you think think i i don't don't know,' know,' said said my my aunt, aunt, turning turning a a deaf deaf ear ear to to the the sister, sister, and and continuing continuing to to address address the the brother, brother, and and to to shake shake her her head head at at him him with with infinite infinite expression, expression, 'what 'what kind kind of of life life you must must have have led led that that poor, poor, unhappy, unhappy, misdirected misdirected baby? baby? do do you think think i i don't don't know know what what a a woeful woeful day day it it was was for for the the soft soft little little creature creature when when you first first came came in in her her way way -- -- smirking smirking and and making making great great eyes eyes at at her, her, i'll i'll be be bound, bound, as as if if you couldn't couldn't say say boh! boh! to to a a goose!' goose!' 'i 'i never never heard heard anything anything so so elegant!' elegant!' said said miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'do 'do you think think i i can't can't understand understand you as as well well as as if if i i had had seen seen you,' pursued pursued my my aunt, aunt, 'now 'now that that i i do do see see and and hear hear you -- -- which, which, i i tell tell you candidly, candidly, is is anything anything but but a a pleasure pleasure to to me? me? oh oh yes, yes, bless bless us! us! who who so so smooth smooth and and silky silky as as mr. mr. murdstone murdstone at at first! first! the the poor, poor, benighted benighted innocent innocent had had never never seen seen such such a a man. man. he he was was made made of of sweetness. sweetness. he he worshipped worshipped her. her. he he doted doted on on her her boy boy -- -- tenderly tenderly doted doted on on him! him! he he was was to to be be another another father father to to him, him, and and they they were were all all to to live live together together in in a a garden garden of of roses, roses, weren't weren't they? they? ugh! ugh! get get along along with with you, do!' do!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i never never heard heard anything anything like like this this person person in in my my life!' life!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'and 'and when when you had had made made sure sure of of the the poor poor little little fool,' fool,' said said my my aunt aunt -- -- 'god 'god forgive forgive me me that that i i should should call call her her so, so, and and she she gone gone where where you won't won't go go in in a a hurry hurry -- -- because because you had had not not done done wrong wrong enough enough to to her her and and hers, hers, you must must begin begin to to train train her, her, must must you? begin begin to to break break her, her, like like a a poor poor caged caged bird, bird, and and wear wear her her deluded deluded life life away, away, in in teaching teaching her her to to sing sing your your notes?' notes?' 'this 'this is is either either insanity insanity or or intoxication,' intoxication,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, in in a a perfect perfect agony agony at at not not being being able able to to turn turn the the current current of of my my aunt's aunt's address address towards towards herself; herself; 'and 'and my my suspicion suspicion is is that that it's it's intoxication.' intoxication.' miss miss betsey, betsey, without without taking taking the the least least notice notice of of the the interruption, interruption, continued continued to to address address herself herself to to mr. mr. murdstone murdstone as as if if there there had had been been no no such such thing. thing. 'mr. 'mr. murdstone,' murdstone,' she she said, said, shaking shaking her her finger finger at at him, him, 'you were were a a tyrant tyrant to to the the simple simple baby, baby, and and you broke broke her her heart. heart. she she was was a a loving loving baby baby -- -- i i know know that; that; i i knew knew it, it, years years before before you ever ever saw saw her her -- -- and and through through the the best best part part of of her her weakness weakness you gave gave her her the the wounds wounds she she died died of. of. there there is is the the truth truth for for your your comfort, comfort, however however you like like it. it. and and you and and your your instruments instruments may may make make the the most most of of it.' it.' 'allow 'allow me me to to inquire, inquire, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' interposed interposed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'whom 'whom you are are pleased pleased to to call, call, in in a a choice choice of of words words in in which which i i am am not not experienced, experienced, my my brother's brother's instruments?' instruments?' 'it 'it was was clear clear enough, enough, as as i i have have told told you, years years before before you ever ever saw saw her her -- -- and and why, why, in in the the mysterious mysterious dispensations dispensations of of providence, providence, you ever ever did did see see her, her, is is more more than than humanity humanity can can comprehend comprehend -- -- it it was was clear clear enough enough that that the the poor poor soft soft little little thing thing would would marry marry somebody, somebody, at at some some time time or or other; other; but but i i did did hope hope it it wouldn't wouldn't have have been been as as bad bad as as it it has has turned turned out. out. that that was was the the time, time, mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, when when she she gave gave birth birth to to her her boy boy here,' here,' said said my my aunt; aunt; 'to 'to the the poor poor child child you sometimes sometimes tormented tormented her her through through afterwards, afterwards, which which is is a a disagreeable disagreeable remembrance remembrance and and makes makes the the sight sight of of him him odious odious now. now. aye, aye, aye! aye! you needn't needn't wince!' wince!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i know know it's it's true true without without that.' that.' he he had had stood stood by by the the door, door, all all this this while, while, observant observant of of her her with with a a smile smile upon upon his his face, face, though though his his black black eyebrows eyebrows were were heavily heavily contracted. contracted. i i remarked remarked now, now, that, that, though though the the smile smile was was on on his his face face still, still, his his colour colour had had gone gone in in a a moment, moment, and and he he seemed seemed to to breathe breathe as as if if he he had had been been running. running. 'good 'good day, day, sir,' sir,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and good-bye! good-bye! good good day day to to you, too, too, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my aunt, aunt, turning turning suddenly suddenly upon upon his his sister. sister. 'let 'let me me see see you ride ride a a donkey donkey over over my my green green again, again, and and as as sure sure as as you have have a a head head upon upon your your shoulders, shoulders, i'll i'll knock knock your your bonnet bonnet off, off, and and tread tread upon upon it!' it!' it it would would require require a a painter, painter, and and no no common common painter painter too, too, to to depict depict my my aunt's aunt's face face as as she she delivered delivered herself herself of of this this very very unexpected unexpected sentiment, sentiment, and and miss miss murdstone's murdstone's face face as as she she heard heard it. it. but but the the manner manner of of the the speech, speech, no no less less than than the the matter, matter, was was so so fiery, fiery, that that miss miss murdstone, murdstone, without without a a word word in in answer, answer, discreetly discreetly put put her her arm arm through through her her brother's, brother's, and and walked walked haughtily haughtily out out of of the the cottage; cottage; my my aunt aunt remaining remaining in in the the window window looking looking after after them; them; prepared, prepared, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, in in case case of of the the donkey's donkey's reappearance, reappearance, to to carry carry her her threat threat into into instant instant execution. execution. no no attempt attempt at at defiance defiance being being made, made, however, however, her her face face gradually gradually relaxed, relaxed, and and became became so so pleasant, pleasant, that that i i was was emboldened emboldened to to kiss kiss and and thank thank her; her; which which i i did did with with great great heartiness, heartiness, and and with with both both my my arms arms clasped clasped round round her her neck. neck. i i then then shook shook hands hands with with mr. mr. dick, dick, who who shook shook hands hands with with me me a a great great many many times, times, and and hailed hailed this this happy happy close close of of the the proceedings proceedings with with repeated repeated bursts bursts of of laughter. laughter. 'you'll 'you'll consider consider yourself yourself guardian, guardian, jointly jointly with with me, me, of of this this child, child, mr. mr. dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i shall shall be be delighted,' delighted,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'to 'to be be the the guardian guardian of of david's david's son.' son.' 'very 'very good,' good,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'that's 'that's settled. settled. i i have have been been thinking, thinking, do do you know, know, mr. mr. dick, dick, that that i i might might call call him him trotwood?' trotwood?' 'certainly, 'certainly, certainly. certainly. call call him him trotwood, trotwood, certainly,' certainly,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'david's 'david's son's son's trotwood.' trotwood.' 'trotwood 'trotwood copperfield, copperfield, you mean,' mean,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'yes, 'yes, to to be be sure. sure. yes. yes. trotwood trotwood copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, a a little little abashed. abashed. my my aunt aunt took took so so kindly kindly to to the the notion, notion, that that some some ready-made ready-made clothes, clothes, which which were were purchased purchased for for me me that that afternoon, afternoon, were were marked marked 'trotwood 'trotwood copperfield', copperfield', in in her her own own handwriting, handwriting, and and in in indelible indelible marking-ink, marking-ink, before before i i put put them them on; on; and and it it was was settled settled that that all all the the other other clothes clothes which which were were ordered ordered to to be be made made for for me me (a (a complete complete outfit outfit was was bespoke bespoke that that afternoon) afternoon) should should be be marked marked in in the the same same way. way. thus thus i i began began my my new new life, life, in in a a new new name, name, and and with with everything everything new new about about me. me. now now that that the the state state of of doubt doubt was was over, over, i i felt, felt, for for many many days, days, like like one one in in a a dream. dream. i i never never thought thought that that i i had had a a curious curious couple couple of of guardians, guardians, in in my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. dick. dick. i i never never thought thought of of anything anything about about myself, myself, distinctly. distinctly. the the two two things things clearest clearest in in my my mind mind were, were, that that a a remoteness remoteness had had come come upon upon the the old old blunderstone blunderstone life life -- -- which which seemed seemed to to lie lie in in the the haze haze of of an an immeasurable immeasurable distance; distance; and and that that a a curtain curtain had had for for ever ever fallen fallen on on my my life life at at murdstone murdstone and and grinby's. grinby's. no no one one has has ever ever raised raised that that curtain curtain since. since. i i have have lifted lifted it it for for a a moment, moment, even even in in this this narrative, narrative, with with a a reluctant reluctant hand, hand, and and dropped dropped it it gladly. gladly. the the remembrance remembrance of of that that life life is is fraught fraught with with so so much much pain pain to to me, me, with with so so much much mental mental suffering suffering and and want want of of hope, hope, that that i i have have never never had had the the courage courage even even to to examine examine how how long long i i was was doomed doomed to to lead lead it. it. whether whether it it lasted lasted for for a a year, year, or or more, more, or or less, less, i i do do not not know. know. i i only only know know that that it it was, was, and and ceased ceased to to be; be; and and that that i i have have written, written, and and there there i i leave leave it. it. chapter chapter 15. 15. i i make make another another beginning beginning mr. mr. dick dick and and i i soon soon became became the the best best of of friends, friends, and and very very often, often, when when his his day's day's work work was was done, done, went went out out together together to to fly fly the the great great kite. kite. every every day day of of his his life life he he had had a a long long sitting sitting at at the the memorial, memorial, which which never never made made the the least least progress, progress, however however hard hard he he laboured, laboured, for for king king charles charles the the first first always always strayed strayed into into it, it, sooner sooner or or later, later, and and then then it it was was thrown thrown aside, aside, and and another another one one begun. begun. the the patience patience and and hope hope with with which which he he bore bore these these perpetual perpetual disappointments, disappointments, the the mild mild perception perception he he had had that that there there was was something something wrong wrong about about king king charles charles the the first, first, the the feeble feeble efforts efforts he he made made to to keep keep him him out, out, and and the the certainty certainty with with which which he he came came in, in, and and tumbled tumbled the the memorial memorial out out of of all all shape, shape, made made a a deep deep impression impression on on me. me. what what mr. mr. dick dick supposed supposed would would come come of of the the memorial, memorial, if if it it were were completed; completed; where where he he thought thought it it was was to to go, go, or or what what he he thought thought it it was was to to do; do; he he knew knew no no more more than than anybody anybody else, else, i i believe. believe. nor nor was was it it at at all all necessary necessary that that he he should should trouble trouble himself himself with with such such questions, questions, for for if if anything anything were were certain certain under under the the sun, sun, it it was was certain certain that that the the memorial memorial never never would would be be finished. finished. it it was was quite quite an an affecting affecting sight, sight, i i used used to to think, think, to to see see him him with with the the kite kite when when it it was was up up a a great great height height in in the the air. air. what what he he had had told told me, me, in in his his room, room, about about his his belief belief in in its its disseminating disseminating the the statements statements pasted pasted on on it, it, which which were were nothing nothing but but old old leaves leaves of of abortive abortive memorials, memorials, might might have have been been a a fancy fancy with with him him sometimes; sometimes; but but not not when when he he was was out, out, looking looking up up at at the the kite kite in in the the sky, sky, and and feeling feeling it it pull pull and and tug tug at at his his hand. hand. he he never never looked looked so so serene serene as as he he did did then. then. i i used used to to fancy, fancy, as as i i sat sat by by him him of of an an evening, evening, on on a a green green slope, slope, and and saw saw him him watch watch the the kite kite high high in in the the quiet quiet air, air, that that it it lifted lifted his his mind mind out out of of its its confusion, confusion, and and bore bore it it (such (such was was my my boyish boyish thought) thought) into into the the skies. skies. as as he he wound wound the the string string in in and and it it came came lower lower and and lower lower down down out out of of the the beautiful beautiful light, light, until until it it fluttered fluttered to to the the ground, ground, and and lay lay there there like like a a dead dead thing, thing, he he seemed seemed to to wake wake gradually gradually out out of of a a dream; dream; and and i i remember remember to to have have seen seen him him take take it it up, up, and and look look about about him him in in a a lost lost way, way, as as if if they they had had both both come come down down together, together, so so that that i i pitied pitied him him with with all all my my heart. heart. while while i i advanced advanced in in friendship friendship and and intimacy intimacy with with mr. mr. dick, dick, i i did did not not go go backward backward in in the the favour favour of of his his staunch staunch friend, friend, my my aunt. aunt. she she took took so so kindly kindly to to me, me, that, that, in in the the course course of of a a few few weeks, weeks, she she shortened shortened my my adopted adopted name name of of trotwood trotwood into into trot; trot; and and even even encouraged encouraged me me to to hope, hope, that that if if i i went went on on as as i i had had begun, begun, i i might might take take equal equal rank rank in in her her affections affections with with my my sister sister betsey betsey trotwood. trotwood. 'trot,' 'trot,' said said my my aunt aunt one one evening, evening, when when the the backgammon-board backgammon-board was was placed placed as as usual usual for for herself herself and and mr. mr. dick, dick, 'we 'we must must not not forget forget your your education.' education.' this this was was my my only only subject subject of of anxiety, anxiety, and and i i felt felt quite quite delighted delighted by by her her referring referring to to it. it. 'should 'should you like like to to go go to to school school at at canterbury?' canterbury?' said said my my aunt. aunt. i i replied replied that that i i should should like like it it very very much, much, as as it it was was so so near near her. her. 'good,' 'good,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'should 'should you like like to to go go tomorrow?' tomorrow?' being being already already no no stranger stranger to to the the general general rapidity rapidity of of my my aunt's aunt's evolutions, evolutions, i i was was not not surprised surprised by by the the suddenness suddenness of of the the proposal, proposal, and and said: said: 'yes.' 'yes.' 'good,' 'good,' said said my my aunt aunt again. again. 'janet, 'janet, hire hire the the grey grey pony pony and and chaise chaise tomorrow tomorrow morning morning at at ten ten o'clock, o'clock, and and pack pack up up master master trotwood's trotwood's clothes clothes tonight.' tonight.' i i was was greatly greatly elated elated by by these these orders; orders; but but my my heart heart smote smote me me for for my my selfishness, selfishness, when when i i witnessed witnessed their their effect effect on on mr. mr. dick, dick, who who was was so so low-spirited low-spirited at at the the prospect prospect of of our our separation, separation, and and played played so so ill ill in in consequence, consequence, that that my my aunt, aunt, after after giving giving him him several several admonitory admonitory raps raps on on the the knuckles knuckles with with her her dice-box, dice-box, shut shut up up the the board, board, and and declined declined to to play play with with him him any any more. more. but, but, on on hearing hearing from from my my aunt aunt that that i i should should sometimes sometimes come come over over on on a a saturday, saturday, and and that that he he could could sometimes sometimes come come and and see see me me on on a a wednesday, wednesday, he he revived; revived; and and vowed vowed to to make make another another kite kite for for those those occasions, occasions, of of proportions proportions greatly greatly surpassing surpassing the the present present one. one. in in the the morning morning he he was was downhearted downhearted again, again, and and would would have have sustained sustained himself himself by by giving giving me me all all the the money money he he had had in in his his possession, possession, gold gold and and silver silver too, too, if if my my aunt aunt had had not not interposed, interposed, and and limited limited the the gift gift to to five five shillings, shillings, which, which, at at his his earnest earnest petition, petition, were were afterwards afterwards increased increased to to ten. ten. we we parted parted at at the the garden-gate garden-gate in in a a most most affectionate affectionate manner, manner, and and mr. mr. dick dick did did not not go go into into the the house house until until my my aunt aunt had had driven driven me me out out of of sight sight of of it. it. my my aunt, aunt, who who was was perfectly perfectly indifferent indifferent to to public public opinion, opinion, drove drove the the grey grey pony pony through through dover dover in in a a masterly masterly manner; manner; sitting sitting high high and and stiff stiff like like a a state state coachman, coachman, keeping keeping a a steady steady eye eye upon upon him him wherever wherever he he went, went, and and making making a a point point of of not not letting letting him him have have his his own own way way in in any any respect. respect. when when we we came came into into the the country country road, road, she she permitted permitted him him to to relax relax a a little, little, however; however; and and looking looking at at me me down down in in a a valley valley of of cushion cushion by by her her side, side, asked asked me me whether whether i i was was happy? happy? 'very 'very happy happy indeed, indeed, thank thank you, aunt,' aunt,' i i said. said. she she was was much much gratified; gratified; and and both both her her hands hands being being occupied, occupied, patted patted me me on on the the head head with with her her whip. whip. 'is 'is it it a a large large school, school, aunt?' aunt?' i i asked. asked. 'why, 'why, i i don't don't know,' know,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'we 'we are are going going to to mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's first.' first.' 'does 'does he he keep keep a a school?' school?' i i asked. asked. 'no, 'no, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'he 'he keeps keeps an an office.' office.' i i asked asked for for no no more more information information about about mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, as as she she offered offered none, none, and and we we conversed conversed on on other other subjects subjects until until we we came came to to canterbury, canterbury, where, where, as as it it was was market-day, market-day, my my aunt aunt had had a a great great opportunity opportunity of of insinuating insinuating the the grey grey pony pony among among carts, carts, baskets, baskets, vegetables, vegetables, and and huckster's huckster's goods. goods. the the hair-breadth hair-breadth turns turns and and twists twists we we made, made, drew drew down down upon upon us us a a variety variety of of speeches speeches from from the the people people standing standing about, about, which which were were not not always always complimentary; complimentary; but but my my aunt aunt drove drove on on with with perfect perfect indifference, indifference, and and i i dare dare say say would would have have taken taken her her own own way way with with as as much much coolness coolness through through an an enemy's enemy's country. country. at at length length we we stopped stopped before before a a very very old old house house bulging bulging out out over over the the road; road; a a house house with with long long low low lattice-windows lattice-windows bulging bulging out out still still farther, farther, and and beams beams with with carved carved heads heads on on the the ends ends bulging bulging out out too, too, so so that that i i fancied fancied the the whole whole house house was was leaning leaning forward, forward, trying trying to to see see who who was was passing passing on on the the narrow narrow pavement pavement below. below. it it was was quite quite spotless spotless in in its its cleanliness. cleanliness. the the old-fashioned old-fashioned brass brass knocker knocker on on the the low low arched arched door, door, ornamented ornamented with with carved carved garlands garlands of of fruit fruit and and flowers, flowers, twinkled twinkled like like a a star; star; the the two two stone stone steps steps descending descending to to the the door door were were as as white white as as if if they they had had been been covered covered with with fair fair linen; linen; and and all all the the angles angles and and corners, corners, and and carvings carvings and and mouldings, mouldings, and and quaint quaint little little panes panes of of glass, glass, and and quainter quainter little little windows, windows, though though as as old old as as the the hills, hills, were were as as pure pure as as any any snow snow that that ever ever fell fell upon upon the the hills. hills. when when the the pony-chaise pony-chaise stopped stopped at at the the door, door, and and my my eyes eyes were were intent intent upon upon the the house, house, i i saw saw a a cadaverous cadaverous face face appear appear at at a a small small window window on on the the ground ground floor floor (in (in a a little little round round tower tower that that formed formed one one side side of of the the house), house), and and quickly quickly disappear. disappear. the the low low arched arched door door then then opened, opened, and and the the face face came came out. out. it it was was quite quite as as cadaverous cadaverous as as it it had had looked looked in in the the window, window, though though in in the the grain grain of of it it there there was was that that tinge tinge of of red red which which is is sometimes sometimes to to be be observed observed in in the the skins skins of of red-haired red-haired people. people. it it belonged belonged to to a a red-haired red-haired person person -- -- a a youth youth of of fifteen, fifteen, as as i i take take it it now, now, but but looking looking much much older older -- -- whose whose hair hair was was cropped cropped as as close close as as the the closest closest stubble; stubble; who who had had hardly hardly any any eyebrows, eyebrows, and and no no eyelashes, eyelashes, and and eyes eyes of of a a red-brown, red-brown, so so unsheltered unsheltered and and unshaded, unshaded, that that i i remember remember wondering wondering how how he he went went to to sleep. sleep. he he was was high-shouldered high-shouldered and and bony; bony; dressed dressed in in decent decent black, black, with with a a white white wisp wisp of of a a neckcloth; neckcloth; buttoned buttoned up up to to the the throat; throat; and and had had a a long, long, lank, lank, skeleton skeleton hand, hand, which which particularly particularly attracted attracted my my attention, attention, as as he he stood stood at at the the pony's pony's head, head, rubbing rubbing his his chin chin with with it, it, and and looking looking up up at at us us in in the the chaise. chaise. 'is 'is mr. mr. wickfield wickfield at at home, home, uriah uriah heep?' heep?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'mr. 'mr. wickfield's wickfield's at at home, home, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said uriah uriah heep, heep, 'if 'if you'll you'll please please to to walk walk in in there' there' -- -- pointing pointing with with his his long long hand hand to to the the room room he he meant. meant. we we got got out; out; and and leaving leaving him him to to hold hold the the pony, pony, went went into into a a long long low low parlour parlour looking looking towards towards the the street, street, from from the the window window of of which which i i caught caught a a glimpse, glimpse, as as i i went went in, in, of of uriah uriah heep heep breathing breathing into into the the pony's pony's nostrils, nostrils, and and immediately immediately covering covering them them with with his his hand, hand, as as if if he he were were putting putting some some spell spell upon upon him. him. opposite opposite to to the the tall tall old old chimney-piece chimney-piece were were two two portraits: portraits: one one of of a a gentleman gentleman with with grey grey hair hair (though (though not not by by any any means means an an old old man) man) and and black black eyebrows, eyebrows, who who was was looking looking over over some some papers papers tied tied together together with with red red tape; tape; the the other, other, of of a a lady, lady, with with a a very very placid placid and and sweet sweet expression expression of of face, face, who who was was looking looking at at me. me. i i believe believe i i was was turning turning about about in in search search of of uriah's uriah's picture, picture, when, when, a a door door at at the the farther farther end end of of the the room room opening, opening, a a gentleman gentleman entered, entered, at at sight sight of of whom whom i i turned turned to to the the first-mentioned first-mentioned portrait portrait again, again, to to make make quite quite sure sure that that it it had had not not come come out out of of its its frame. frame. but but it it was was stationary; stationary; and and as as the the gentleman gentleman advanced advanced into into the the light, light, i i saw saw that that he he was was some some years years older older than than when when he he had had had had his his picture picture painted. painted. 'miss 'miss betsey betsey trotwood,' trotwood,' said said the the gentleman, gentleman, 'pray 'pray walk walk in. in. i i was was engaged engaged for for a a moment, moment, but but you'll you'll excuse excuse my my being being busy. busy. you know know my my motive. motive. i i have have but but one one in in life.' life.' miss miss betsey betsey thanked thanked him, him, and and we we went went into into his his room, room, which which was was furnished furnished as as an an office, office, with with books, books, papers, papers, tin tin boxes, boxes, and and so so forth. forth. it it looked looked into into a a garden, garden, and and had had an an iron iron safe safe let let into into the the wall; wall; so so immediately immediately over over the the mantelshelf, mantelshelf, that that i i wondered, wondered, as as i i sat sat down, down, how how the the sweeps sweeps got got round round it it when when they they swept swept the the chimney. chimney. 'well, 'well, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said mr. mr. wickfield; wickfield; for for i i soon soon found found that that it it was was he, he, and and that that he he was was a a lawyer, lawyer, and and steward steward of of the the estates estates of of a a rich rich gentleman gentleman of of the the county; county; 'what 'what wind wind blows blows you here? here? not not an an ill ill wind, wind, i i hope?' hope?' 'no,' 'no,' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i have have not not come come for for any any law.' law.' 'that's 'that's right, right, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'you had had better better come come for for anything anything else.' else.' his his hair hair was was quite quite white white now, now, though though his his eyebrows eyebrows were were still still black. black. he he had had a a very very agreeable agreeable face, face, and, and, i i thought, thought, was was handsome. handsome. there there was was a a certain certain richness richness in in his his complexion, complexion, which which i i had had been been long long accustomed, accustomed, under under peggotty's peggotty's tuition, tuition, to to connect connect with with port port wine; wine; and and i i fancied fancied it it was was in in his his voice voice too, too, and and referred referred his his growing growing corpulency corpulency to to the the same same cause. cause. he he was was very very cleanly cleanly dressed, dressed, in in a a blue blue coat, coat, striped striped waistcoat, waistcoat, and and nankeen nankeen trousers; trousers; and and his his fine fine frilled frilled shirt shirt and and cambric cambric neckcloth neckcloth looked looked unusually unusually soft soft and and white, white, reminding reminding my my strolling strolling fancy fancy (i (i call call to to mind) mind) of of the the plumage plumage on on the the breast breast of of a a swan. swan. 'this 'this is is my my nephew,' nephew,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'wasn't 'wasn't aware aware you had had one, one, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'my 'my grand-nephew, grand-nephew, that that is is to to say,' say,' observed observed my my aunt. aunt. 'wasn't 'wasn't aware aware you had had a a grand-nephew, grand-nephew, i i give give you my my word,' word,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'i 'i have have adopted adopted him,' him,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a wave wave of of her her hand, hand, importing importing that that his his knowledge knowledge and and his his ignorance ignorance were were all all one one to to her, her, 'and 'and i i have have brought brought him him here, here, to to put put to to a a school school where where he he may may be be thoroughly thoroughly well well taught, taught, and and well well treated. treated. now now tell tell me me where where that that school school is, is, and and what what it it is, is, and and all all about about it.' it.' 'before 'before i i can can advise advise you properly,' properly,' said said mr. mr. wickfield wickfield -- -- 'the 'the old old question, question, you know. know. what's what's your your motive motive in in this?' this?' 'deuce 'deuce take take the the man!' man!' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt. aunt. 'always 'always fishing fishing for for motives, motives, when when they're they're on on the the surface! surface! why, why, to to make make the the child child happy happy and and useful.' useful.' 'it 'it must must be be a a mixed mixed motive, motive, i i think,' think,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, shaking shaking his his head head and and smiling smiling incredulously. incredulously. 'a 'a mixed mixed fiddlestick,' fiddlestick,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'you claim claim to to have have one one plain plain motive motive in in all all you do do yourself. yourself. you don't don't suppose, suppose, i i hope, hope, that that you are are the the only only plain plain dealer dealer in in the the world?' world?' 'ay, 'ay, but but i i have have only only one one motive motive in in life, life, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' he he rejoined, rejoined, smiling. smiling. 'other 'other people people have have dozens, dozens, scores, scores, hundreds. hundreds. i i have have only only one. one. there's there's the the difference. difference. however, however, that's that's beside beside the the question. question. the the best best school? school? whatever whatever the the motive, motive, you want want the the best?' best?' my my aunt aunt nodded nodded assent. assent. 'at 'at the the best best we we have,' have,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, considering, considering, 'your 'your nephew nephew couldn't couldn't board board just just now.' now.' 'but 'but he he could could board board somewhere somewhere else, else, i i suppose?' suppose?' suggested suggested my my aunt. aunt. mr. mr. wickfield wickfield thought thought i i could. could. after after a a little little discussion, discussion, he he proposed proposed to to take take my my aunt aunt to to the the school, school, that that she she might might see see it it and and judge judge for for herself; herself; also, also, to to take take her, her, with with the the same same object, object, to to two two or or three three houses houses where where he he thought thought i i could could be be boarded. boarded. my my aunt aunt embracing embracing the the proposal, proposal, we we were were all all three three going going out out together, together, when when he he stopped stopped and and said: said: 'our 'our little little friend friend here here might might have have some some motive, motive, perhaps, perhaps, for for objecting objecting to to the the arrangements. arrangements. i i think think we we had had better better leave leave him him behind?' behind?' my my aunt aunt seemed seemed disposed disposed to to contest contest the the point; point; but but to to facilitate facilitate matters matters i i said said i i would would gladly gladly remain remain behind, behind, if if they they pleased; pleased; and and returned returned into into mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's office, office, where where i i sat sat down down again, again, in in the the chair chair i i had had first first occupied, occupied, to to await await their their return. return. it it so so happened happened that that this this chair chair was was opposite opposite a a narrow narrow passage, passage, which which ended ended in in the the little little circular circular room room where where i i had had seen seen uriah uriah heep's heep's pale pale face face looking looking out out of of the the window. window. uriah, uriah, having having taken taken the the pony pony to to a a neighbouring neighbouring stable, stable, was was at at work work at at a a desk desk in in this this room, room, which which had had a a brass brass frame frame on on the the top top to to hang hang paper paper upon, upon, and and on on which which the the writing writing he he was was making making a a copy copy of of was was then then hanging. hanging. though though his his face face was was towards towards me, me, i i thought, thought, for for some some time, time, the the writing writing being being between between us, us, that that he he could could not not see see me; me; but but looking looking that that way way more more attentively, attentively, it it made made me me uncomfortable uncomfortable to to observe observe that, that, every every now now and and then, then, his his sleepless sleepless eyes eyes would would come come below below the the writing, writing, like like two two red red suns, suns, and and stealthily stealthily stare stare at at me me for for i i dare dare say say a a whole whole minute minute at at a a time, time, during during which which his his pen pen went, went, or or pretended pretended to to go, go, as as cleverly cleverly as as ever. ever. i i made made several several attempts attempts to to get get out out of of their their way way -- -- such such as as standing standing on on a a chair chair to to look look at at a a map map on on the the other other side side of of the the room, room, and and poring poring over over the the columns columns of of a a kentish kentish newspaper newspaper -- -- but but they they always always attracted attracted me me back back again; again; and and whenever whenever i i looked looked towards towards those those two two red red suns, suns, i i was was sure sure to to find find them, them, either either just just rising rising or or just just setting. setting. at at length, length, much much to to my my relief, relief, my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield came came back, back, after after a a pretty pretty long long absence. absence. they they were were not not so so successful successful as as i i could could have have wished; wished; for for though though the the advantages advantages of of the the school school were were undeniable, undeniable, my my aunt aunt had had not not approved approved of of any any of of the the boarding-houses boarding-houses proposed proposed for for me. me. 'it's 'it's very very unfortunate,' unfortunate,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i don't don't know know what what to to do, do, trot.' trot.' 'it 'it does does happen happen unfortunately,' unfortunately,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'but 'but i'll i'll tell tell you what what you can can do, do, miss miss trotwood.' trotwood.' 'what's 'what's that?' that?' inquired inquired my my aunt. aunt. 'leave 'leave your your nephew nephew here, here, for for the the present. present. he's he's a a quiet quiet fellow. fellow. he he won't won't disturb disturb me me at at all. all. it's it's a a capital capital house house for for study. study. as as quiet quiet as as a a monastery, monastery, and and almost almost as as roomy. roomy. leave leave him him here.' here.' my my aunt aunt evidently evidently liked liked the the offer, offer, though though she she was was delicate delicate of of accepting accepting it. it. so so did did i. i. 'come, 'come, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'this 'this is is the the way way out out of of the the difficulty. difficulty. it's it's only only a a temporary temporary arrangement, arrangement, you know. know. if if it it don't don't act act well, well, or or don't don't quite quite accord accord with with our our mutual mutual convenience, convenience, he he can can easily easily go go to to the the right-about. right-about. there there will will be be time time to to find find some some better better place place for for him him in in the the meanwhile. meanwhile. you had had better better determine determine to to leave leave him him here here for for the the present!' present!' 'i 'i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you,' said said my my aunt; aunt; 'and 'and so so is is he, he, i i see; see; but but -- -- ' ' 'come! 'come! i i know know what what you mean,' mean,' cried cried mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'you shall shall not not be be oppressed oppressed by by the the receipt receipt of of favours, favours, miss miss trotwood. trotwood. you may may pay pay for for him, him, if if you like. like. we we won't won't be be hard hard about about terms, terms, but but you shall shall pay pay if if you will.' will.' 'on 'on that that understanding,' understanding,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'though 'though it it doesn't doesn't lessen lessen the the real real obligation, obligation, i i shall shall be be very very glad glad to to leave leave him.' him.' 'then 'then come come and and see see my my little little housekeeper,' housekeeper,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. we we accordingly accordingly went went up up a a wonderful wonderful old old staircase; staircase; with with a a balustrade balustrade so so broad broad that that we we might might have have gone gone up up that, that, almost almost as as easily; easily; and and into into a a shady shady old old drawing-room, drawing-room, lighted lighted by by some some three three or or four four of of the the quaint quaint windows windows i i had had looked looked up up at at from from the the street: street: which which had had old old oak oak seats seats in in them, them, that that seemed seemed to to have have come come of of the the same same trees trees as as the the shining shining oak oak floor, floor, and and the the great great beams beams in in the the ceiling. ceiling. it it was was a a prettily prettily furnished furnished room, room, with with a a piano piano and and some some lively lively furniture furniture in in red red and and green, green, and and some some flowers. flowers. it it seemed seemed to to be be all all old old nooks nooks and and corners; corners; and and in in every every nook nook and and corner corner there there was was some some queer queer little little table, table, or or cupboard, cupboard, or or bookcase, bookcase, or or seat, seat, or or something something or or other, other, that that made made me me think think there there was was not not such such another another good good corner corner in in the the room; room; until until i i looked looked at at the the next next one, one, and and found found it it equal equal to to it, it, if if not not better. better. on on everything everything there there was was the the same same air air of of retirement retirement and and cleanliness cleanliness that that marked marked the the house house outside. outside. mr. mr. wickfield wickfield tapped tapped at at a a door door in in a a corner corner of of the the panelled panelled wall, wall, and and a a girl girl of of about about my my own own age age came came quickly quickly out out and and kissed kissed him. him. on on her her face, face, i i saw saw immediately immediately the the placid placid and and sweet sweet expression expression of of the the lady lady whose whose picture picture had had looked looked at at me me downstairs. downstairs. it it seemed seemed to to my my imagination imagination as as if if the the portrait portrait had had grown grown womanly, womanly, and and the the original original remained remained a a child. child. although although her her face face was was quite quite bright bright and and happy, happy, there there was was a a tranquillity tranquillity about about it, it, and and about about her her -- -- a a quiet, quiet, good, good, calm calm spirit spirit -- -- that that i i never never have have forgotten; forgotten; that that i i shall shall never never forget. forget. this this was was his his little little housekeeper, housekeeper, his his daughter daughter agnes, agnes, mr. mr. wickfield wickfield said. said. when when i i heard heard how how he he said said it, it, and and saw saw how how he he held held her her hand, hand, i i guessed guessed what what the the one one motive motive of of his his life life was. was. she she had had a a little little basket-trifle basket-trifle hanging hanging at at her her side, side, with with keys keys in in it; it; and and she she looked looked as as staid staid and and as as discreet discreet a a housekeeper housekeeper as as the the old old house house could could have. have. she she listened listened to to her her father father as as he he told told her her about about me, me, with with a a pleasant pleasant face; face; and and when when he he had had concluded, concluded, proposed proposed to to my my aunt aunt that that we we should should go go upstairs upstairs and and see see my my room. room. we we all all went went together, together, she she before before us: us: and and a a glorious glorious old old room room it it was, was, with with more more oak oak beams, beams, and and diamond diamond panes; panes; and and the the broad broad balustrade balustrade going going all all the the way way up up to to it. it. i i cannot cannot call call to to mind mind where where or or when, when, in in my my childhood, childhood, i i had had seen seen a a stained stained glass glass window window in in a a church. church. nor nor do do i i recollect recollect its its subject. subject. but but i i know know that that when when i i saw saw her her turn turn round, round, in in the the grave grave light light of of the the old old staircase, staircase, and and wait wait for for us, us, above, above, i i thought thought of of that that window; window; and and i i associated associated something something of of its its tranquil tranquil brightness brightness with with agnes agnes wickfield wickfield ever ever afterwards. afterwards. my my aunt aunt was was as as happy happy as as i i was, was, in in the the arrangement arrangement made made for for me; me; and and we we went went down down to to the the drawing-room drawing-room again, again, well well pleased pleased and and gratified. gratified. as as she she would would not not hear hear of of staying staying to to dinner, dinner, lest lest she she should should by by any any chance chance fail fail to to arrive arrive at at home home with with the the grey grey pony pony before before dark; dark; and and as as i i apprehend apprehend mr. mr. wickfield wickfield knew knew her her too too well well to to argue argue any any point point with with her; her; some some lunch lunch was was provided provided for for her her there, there, and and agnes agnes went went back back to to her her governess, governess, and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield to to his his office. office. so so we we were were left left to to take take leave leave of of one one another another without without any any restraint. restraint. she she told told me me that that everything everything would would be be arranged arranged for for me me by by mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, and and that that i i should should want want for for nothing, nothing, and and gave gave me me the the kindest kindest words words and and the the best best advice. advice. 'trot,' 'trot,' said said my my aunt aunt in in conclusion, conclusion, 'be 'be a a credit credit to to yourself, yourself, to to me, me, and and mr. mr. dick, dick, and and heaven heaven be be with with you!' i i was was greatly greatly overcome, overcome, and and could could only only thank thank her, her, again again and and again, again, and and send send my my love love to to mr. mr. dick. dick. 'never,' 'never,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'be 'be mean mean in in anything; anything; never never be be false; false; never never be be cruel. cruel. avoid avoid those those three three vices, vices, trot, trot, and and i i can can always always be be hopeful hopeful of of you.' i i promised, promised, as as well well as as i i could, could, that that i i would would not not abuse abuse her her kindness kindness or or forget forget her her admonition. admonition. 'the 'the pony's pony's at at the the door,' door,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and i i am am off! off! stay stay here.' here.' with with these these words words she she embraced embraced me me hastily, hastily, and and went went out out of of the the room, room, shutting shutting the the door door after after her. her. at at first first i i was was startled startled by by so so abrupt abrupt a a departure, departure, and and almost almost feared feared i i had had displeased displeased her; her; but but when when i i looked looked into into the the street, street, and and saw saw how how dejectedly dejectedly she she got got into into the the chaise, chaise, and and drove drove away away without without looking looking up, up, i i understood understood her her better better and and did did not not do do her her that that injustice. injustice. by by five five o'clock, o'clock, which which was was mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's dinner-hour, dinner-hour, i i had had mustered mustered up up my my spirits spirits again, again, and and was was ready ready for for my my knife knife and and fork. fork. the the cloth cloth was was only only laid laid for for us us two; two; but but agnes agnes was was waiting waiting in in the the drawing-room drawing-room before before dinner, dinner, went went down down with with her her father, father, and and sat sat opposite opposite to to him him at at table. table. i i doubted doubted whether whether he he could could have have dined dined without without her. her. we we did did not not stay stay there, there, after after dinner, dinner, but but came came upstairs upstairs into into the the drawing-room drawing-room again: again: in in one one snug snug corner corner of of which, which, agnes agnes set set glasses glasses for for her her father, father, and and a a decanter decanter of of port port wine. wine. i i thought thought he he would would have have missed missed its its usual usual flavour, flavour, if if it it had had been been put put there there for for him him by by any any other other hands. hands. there there he he sat, sat, taking taking his his wine, wine, and and taking taking a a good good deal deal of of it, it, for for two two hours; hours; while while agnes agnes played played on on the the piano, piano, worked, worked, and and talked talked to to him him and and me. me. he he was, was, for for the the most most part, part, gay gay and and cheerful cheerful with with us; us; but but sometimes sometimes his his eyes eyes rested rested on on her, her, and and he he fell fell into into a a brooding brooding state, state, and and was was silent. silent. she she always always observed observed this this quickly, quickly, i i thought, thought, and and always always roused roused him him with with a a question question or or caress. caress. then then he he came came out out of of his his meditation, meditation, and and drank drank more more wine. wine. agnes agnes made made the the tea, tea, and and presided presided over over it; it; and and the the time time passed passed away away after after it, it, as as after after dinner, dinner, until until she she went went to to bed; bed; when when her her father father took took her her in in his his arms arms and and kissed kissed her, her, and, and, she she being being gone, gone, ordered ordered candles candles in in his his office. office. then then i i went went to to bed bed too. too. but but in in the the course course of of the the evening evening i i had had rambled rambled down down to to the the door, door, and and a a little little way way along along the the street, street, that that i i might might have have another another peep peep at at the the old old houses, houses, and and the the grey grey cathedral; cathedral; and and might might think think of of my my coming coming through through that that old old city city on on my my journey, journey, and and of of my my passing passing the the very very house house i i lived lived in, in, without without knowing knowing it. it. as as i i came came back, back, i i saw saw uriah uriah heep heep shutting shutting up up the the office; office; and and feeling feeling friendly friendly towards towards everybody, everybody, went went in in and and spoke spoke to to him, him, and and at at parting, parting, gave gave him him my my hand. hand. but but oh, oh, what what a a clammy clammy hand hand his his was! was! as as ghostly ghostly to to the the touch touch as as to to the the sight! sight! i i rubbed rubbed mine mine afterwards, afterwards, to to warm warm it, it, and and to to rub rub his his off. off. it it was was such such an an uncomfortable uncomfortable hand, hand, that, that, when when i i went went to to my my room, room, it it was was still still cold cold and and wet wet upon upon my my memory. memory. leaning leaning out out of of the the window, window, and and seeing seeing one one of of the the faces faces on on the the beam-ends beam-ends looking looking at at me me sideways, sideways, i i fancied fancied it it was was uriah uriah heep heep got got up up there there somehow, somehow, and and shut shut him him out out in in a a hurry. hurry. chapter chapter 16. 16. i i am am a a new new boy boy in in more more senses senses than than one one next next morning, morning, after after breakfast, breakfast, i i entered entered on on school school life life again. again. i i went, went, accompanied accompanied by by mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, to to the the scene scene of of my my future future studies studies -- -- a a grave grave building building in in a a courtyard, courtyard, with with a a learned learned air air about about it it that that seemed seemed very very well well suited suited to to the the stray stray rooks rooks and and jackdaws jackdaws who who came came down down from from the the cathedral cathedral towers towers to to walk walk with with a a clerkly clerkly bearing bearing on on the the grass-plot grass-plot -- -- and and was was introduced introduced to to my my new new master, master, doctor doctor strong. strong. doctor doctor strong strong looked looked almost almost as as rusty, rusty, to to my my thinking, thinking, as as the the tall tall iron iron rails rails and and gates gates outside outside the the house; house; and and almost almost as as stiff stiff and and heavy heavy as as the the great great stone stone urns urns that that flanked flanked them, them, and and were were set set up, up, on on the the top top of of the the red-brick red-brick wall, wall, at at regular regular distances distances all all round round the the court, court, like like sublimated sublimated skittles, skittles, for for time time to to play play at. at. he he was was in in his his library library (i (i mean mean doctor doctor strong strong was), was), with with his his clothes clothes not not particularly particularly well well brushed, brushed, and and his his hair hair not not particularly particularly well well combed; combed; his his knee-smalls knee-smalls unbraced; unbraced; his his long long black black gaiters gaiters unbuttoned; unbuttoned; and and his his shoes shoes yawning yawning like like two two caverns caverns on on the the hearth-rug. hearth-rug. turning turning upon upon me me a a lustreless lustreless eye, eye, that that reminded reminded me me of of a a long-forgotten long-forgotten blind blind old old horse horse who who once once used used to to crop crop the the grass, grass, and and tumble tumble over over the the graves, graves, in in blunderstone blunderstone churchyard, churchyard, he he said said he he was was glad glad to to see see me: me: and and then then he he gave gave me me his his hand; hand; which which i i didn't didn't know know what what to to do do with, with, as as it it did did nothing nothing for for itself. itself. but, but, sitting sitting at at work, work, not not far far from from doctor doctor strong, strong, was was a a very very pretty pretty young young lady lady -- -- whom whom he he called called annie, annie, and and who who was was his his daughter, daughter, i i supposed supposed -- -- who who got got me me out out of of my my difficulty difficulty by by kneeling kneeling down down to to put put doctor doctor strong's strong's shoes shoes on, on, and and button button his his gaiters, gaiters, which which she she did did with with great great cheerfulness cheerfulness and and quickness. quickness. when when she she had had finished, finished, and and we we were were going going out out to to the the schoolroom, schoolroom, i i was was much much surprised surprised to to hear hear mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, in in bidding bidding her her good good morning, morning, address address her her as as 'mrs. 'mrs. strong'; strong'; and and i i was was wondering wondering could could she she be be doctor doctor strong's strong's son's son's wife, wife, or or could could she she be be mrs. mrs. doctor doctor strong, strong, when when doctor doctor strong strong himself himself unconsciously unconsciously enlightened enlightened me. me. 'by 'by the the by, by, wickfield,' wickfield,' he he said, said, stopping stopping in in a a passage passage with with his his hand hand on on my my shoulder; shoulder; 'you have have not not found found any any suitable suitable provision provision for for my my wife's wife's cousin cousin yet?' yet?' 'no,' 'no,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'no. 'no. not not yet.' yet.' 'i 'i could could wish wish it it done done as as soon soon as as it it can can be be done, done, wickfield,' wickfield,' said said doctor doctor strong, strong, 'for 'for jack jack maldon maldon is is needy, needy, and and idle; idle; and and of of those those two two bad bad things, things, worse worse things things sometimes sometimes come. come. what what does does doctor doctor watts watts say,' say,' he he added, added, looking looking at at me, me, and and moving moving his his head head to to the the time time of of his his quotation, quotation, '"satan '"satan finds finds some some mischief mischief still, still, for for idle idle hands hands to to do."' do."' 'egad, 'egad, doctor,' doctor,' returned returned mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, 'if 'if doctor doctor watts watts knew knew mankind, mankind, he he might might have have written, written, with with as as much much truth, truth, "satan "satan finds finds some some mischief mischief still, still, for for busy busy hands hands to to do." do." the the busy busy people people achieve achieve their their full full share share of of mischief mischief in in the the world, world, you may may rely rely upon upon it. it. what what have have the the people people been been about, about, who who have have been been the the busiest busiest in in getting getting money, money, and and in in getting getting power, power, this this century century or or two? two? no no mischief?' mischief?' 'jack 'jack maldon maldon will will never never be be very very busy busy in in getting getting either, either, i i expect,' expect,' said said doctor doctor strong, strong, rubbing rubbing his his chin chin thoughtfully. thoughtfully. 'perhaps 'perhaps not,' not,' said said mr. mr. wickfield; wickfield; 'and 'and you bring bring me me back back to to the the question, question, with with an an apology apology for for digressing. digressing. no, no, i i have have not not been been able able to to dispose dispose of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon yet. yet. i i believe,' believe,' he he said said this this with with some some hesitation, hesitation, 'i 'i penetrate penetrate your your motive, motive, and and it it makes makes the the thing thing more more difficult.' difficult.' 'my 'my motive,' motive,' returned returned doctor doctor strong, strong, 'is 'is to to make make some some suitable suitable provision provision for for a a cousin, cousin, and and an an old old playfellow, playfellow, of of annie's.' annie's.' 'yes, 'yes, i i know,' know,' said said mr. mr. wickfield; wickfield; 'at 'at home home or or abroad.' abroad.' 'aye!' 'aye!' replied replied the the doctor, doctor, apparently apparently wondering wondering why why he he emphasized emphasized those those words words so so much. much. 'at 'at home home or or abroad.' abroad.' 'your 'your own own expression, expression, you know,' know,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'or 'or abroad.' abroad.' 'surely,' 'surely,' the the doctor doctor answered. answered. 'surely. 'surely. one one or or other.' other.' 'one 'one or or other? other? have have you no no choice?' choice?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'no,' 'no,' returned returned the the doctor. doctor. 'no?' 'no?' with with astonishment. astonishment. 'not 'not the the least.' least.' 'no 'no motive,' motive,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, 'for 'for meaning meaning abroad, abroad, and and not not at at home?' home?' 'no,' 'no,' returned returned the the doctor. doctor. 'i 'i am am bound bound to to believe believe you, and and of of course course i i do do believe believe you,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'it 'it might might have have simplified simplified my my office office very very much, much, if if i i had had known known it it before. before. but but i i confess confess i i entertained entertained another another impression.' impression.' doctor doctor strong strong regarded regarded him him with with a a puzzled puzzled and and doubting doubting look, look, which which almost almost immediately immediately subsided subsided into into a a smile smile that that gave gave me me great great encouragement; encouragement; for for it it was was full full of of amiability amiability and and sweetness, sweetness, and and there there was was a a simplicity simplicity in in it, it, and and indeed indeed in in his his whole whole manner, manner, when when the the studious, studious, pondering pondering frost frost upon upon it it was was got got through, through, very very attractive attractive and and hopeful hopeful to to a a young young scholar scholar like like me. me. repeating repeating 'no', 'no', and and 'not 'not the the least', least', and and other other short short assurances assurances to to the the same same purport, purport, doctor doctor strong strong jogged jogged on on before before us, us, at at a a queer, queer, uneven uneven pace; pace; and and we we followed: followed: mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, looking looking grave, grave, i i observed, observed, and and shaking shaking his his head head to to himself, himself, without without knowing knowing that that i i saw saw him. him. the the schoolroom schoolroom was was a a pretty pretty large large hall, hall, on on the the quietest quietest side side of of the the house, house, confronted confronted by by the the stately stately stare stare of of some some half-dozen half-dozen of of the the great great urns, urns, and and commanding commanding a a peep peep of of an an old old secluded secluded garden garden belonging belonging to to the the doctor, doctor, where where the the peaches peaches were were ripening ripening on on the the sunny sunny south south wall. wall. there there were were two two great great aloes, aloes, in in tubs, tubs, on on the the turf turf outside outside the the windows; windows; the the broad broad hard hard leaves leaves of of which which plant plant (looking (looking as as if if they they were were made made of of painted painted tin) tin) have have ever ever since, since, by by association, association, been been symbolical symbolical to to me me of of silence silence and and retirement. retirement. about about five-and-twenty five-and-twenty boys boys were were studiously studiously engaged engaged at at their their books books when when we we went went in, in, but but they they rose rose to to give give the the doctor doctor good good morning, morning, and and remained remained standing standing when when they they saw saw mr. mr. wickfield wickfield and and me. me. 'a 'a new new boy, boy, young young gentlemen,' gentlemen,' said said the the doctor; doctor; 'trotwood 'trotwood copperfield.' copperfield.' one one adams, adams, who who was was the the head-boy, head-boy, then then stepped stepped out out of of his his place place and and welcomed welcomed me. me. he he looked looked like like a a young young clergyman, clergyman, in in his his white white cravat, cravat, but but he he was was very very affable affable and and good-humoured; good-humoured; and and he he showed showed me me my my place, place, and and presented presented me me to to the the masters, masters, in in a a gentlemanly gentlemanly way way that that would would have have put put me me at at my my ease, ease, if if anything anything could. could. it it seemed seemed to to me me so so long, long, however, however, since since i i had had been been among among such such boys, boys, or or among among any any companions companions of of my my own own age, age, except except mick mick walker walker and and mealy mealy potatoes, potatoes, that that i i felt felt as as strange strange as as ever ever i i have have done done in in my my life. life. i i was was so so conscious conscious of of having having passed passed through through scenes scenes of of which which they they could could have have no no knowledge, knowledge, and and of of having having acquired acquired experiences experiences foreign foreign to to my my age, age, appearance, appearance, and and condition condition as as one one of of them, them, that that i i half half believed believed it it was was an an imposture imposture to to come come there there as as an an ordinary ordinary little little schoolboy. schoolboy. i i had had become, become, in in the the murdstone murdstone and and grinby grinby time, time, however however short short or or long long it it may may have have been, been, so so unused unused to to the the sports sports and and games games of of boys, boys, that that i i knew knew i i was was awkward awkward and and inexperienced inexperienced in in the the commonest commonest things things belonging belonging to to them. them. whatever whatever i i had had learnt, learnt, had had so so slipped slipped away away from from me me in in the the sordid sordid cares cares of of my my life life from from day day to to night, night, that that now, now, when when i i was was examined examined about about what what i i knew, knew, i i knew knew nothing, nothing, and and was was put put into into the the lowest lowest form form of of the the school. school. but, but, troubled troubled as as i i was, was, by by my my want want of of boyish boyish skill, skill, and and of of book-learning book-learning too, too, i i was was made made infinitely infinitely more more uncomfortable uncomfortable by by the the consideration, consideration, that, that, in in what what i i did did know, know, i i was was much much farther farther removed removed from from my my companions companions than than in in what what i i did did not. not. my my mind mind ran ran upon upon what what they they would would think, think, if if they they knew knew of of my my familiar familiar acquaintance acquaintance with with the the king's king's bench bench prison? prison? was was there there anything anything about about me me which which would would reveal reveal my my proceedings proceedings in in connexion connexion with with the the micawber micawber family family -- -- all all those those pawnings, pawnings, and and sellings, sellings, and and suppers suppers -- -- in in spite spite of of myself? myself? suppose suppose some some of of the the boys boys had had seen seen me me coming coming through through canterbury, canterbury, wayworn wayworn and and ragged, ragged, and and should should find find me me out? out? what what would would they they say, say, who who made made so so light light of of money, money, if if they they could could know know how how i i had had scraped scraped my my halfpence halfpence together, together, for for the the purchase purchase of of my my daily daily saveloy saveloy and and beer, beer, or or my my slices slices of of pudding? pudding? how how would would it it affect affect them, them, who who were were so so innocent innocent of of london london life, life, and and london london streets, streets, to to discover discover how how knowing knowing i i was was (and (and was was ashamed ashamed to to be) be) in in some some of of the the meanest meanest phases phases of of both? both? all all this this ran ran in in my my head head so so much, much, on on that that first first day day at at doctor doctor strong's, strong's, that that i i felt felt distrustful distrustful of of my my slightest slightest look look and and gesture; gesture; shrunk shrunk within within myself myself whensoever whensoever i i was was approached approached by by one one of of my my new new schoolfellows; schoolfellows; and and hurried hurried off off the the minute minute school school was was over, over, afraid afraid of of committing committing myself myself in in my my response response to to any any friendly friendly notice notice or or advance. advance. but but there there was was such such an an influence influence in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's old old house, house, that that when when i i knocked knocked at at it, it, with with my my new new school-books school-books under under my my arm, arm, i i began began to to feel feel my my uneasiness uneasiness softening softening away. away. as as i i went went up up to to my my airy airy old old room, room, the the grave grave shadow shadow of of the the staircase staircase seemed seemed to to fall fall upon upon my my doubts doubts and and fears, fears, and and to to make make the the past past more more indistinct. indistinct. i i sat sat there, there, sturdily sturdily conning conning my my books, books, until until dinner-time dinner-time (we (we were were out out of of school school for for good good at at three); three); and and went went down, down, hopeful hopeful of of becoming becoming a a passable passable sort sort of of boy boy yet. yet. agnes agnes was was in in the the drawing-room, drawing-room, waiting waiting for for her her father, father, who who was was detained detained by by someone someone in in his his office. office. she she met met me me with with her her pleasant pleasant smile, smile, and and asked asked me me how how i i liked liked the the school. school. i i told told her her i i should should like like it it very very much, much, i i hoped; hoped; but but i i was was a a little little strange strange to to it it at at first. first. 'you have have never never been been to to school,' school,' i i said, said, 'have 'have you?' 'oh 'oh yes! yes! every every day.' day.' 'ah, 'ah, but but you mean mean here, here, at at your your own own home?' home?' 'papa 'papa couldn't couldn't spare spare me me to to go go anywhere anywhere else,' else,' she she answered, answered, smiling smiling and and shaking shaking her her head. head. 'his 'his housekeeper housekeeper must must be be in in his his house, house, you know.' know.' 'he 'he is is very very fond fond of of you, i i am am sure,' sure,' i i said. said. she she nodded nodded 'yes,' 'yes,' and and went went to to the the door door to to listen listen for for his his coming coming up, up, that that she she might might meet meet him him on on the the stairs. stairs. but, but, as as he he was was not not there, there, she she came came back back again. again. 'mama 'mama has has been been dead dead ever ever since since i i was was born,' born,' she she said, said, in in her her quiet quiet way. way. 'i 'i only only know know her her picture, picture, downstairs. downstairs. i i saw saw you looking looking at at it it yesterday. yesterday. did did you think think whose whose it it was?' was?' i i told told her her yes, yes, because because it it was was so so like like herself. herself. 'papa 'papa says says so, so, too,' too,' said said agnes, agnes, pleased. pleased. 'hark! 'hark! that's that's papa papa now!' now!' her her bright bright calm calm face face lighted lighted up up with with pleasure pleasure as as she she went went to to meet meet him, him, and and as as they they came came in, in, hand hand in in hand. hand. he he greeted greeted me me cordially; cordially; and and told told me me i i should should certainly certainly be be happy happy under under doctor doctor strong, strong, who who was was one one of of the the gentlest gentlest of of men. men. 'there 'there may may be be some, some, perhaps perhaps -- -- i i don't don't know know that that there there are are -- -- who who abuse abuse his his kindness,' kindness,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'never 'never be be one one of of those, those, trotwood, trotwood, in in anything. anything. he he is is the the least least suspicious suspicious of of mankind; mankind; and and whether whether that's that's a a merit, merit, or or whether whether it's it's a a blemish, blemish, it it deserves deserves consideration consideration in in all all dealings dealings with with the the doctor, doctor, great great or or small.' small.' he he spoke, spoke, i i thought, thought, as as if if he he were were weary, weary, or or dissatisfied dissatisfied with with something; something; but but i i did did not not pursue pursue the the question question in in my my mind, mind, for for dinner dinner was was just just then then announced, announced, and and we we went went down down and and took took the the same same seats seats as as before. before. we we had had scarcely scarcely done done so, so, when when uriah uriah heep heep put put in in his his red red head head and and his his lank lank hand hand at at the the door, door, and and said: said: 'here's 'here's mr. mr. maldon maldon begs begs the the favour favour of of a a word, word, sir.' sir.' 'i 'i am am but but this this moment moment quit quit of of mr. mr. maldon,' maldon,' said said his his master. master. 'yes, 'yes, sir,' sir,' returned returned uriah; uriah; 'but 'but mr. mr. maldon maldon has has come come back, back, and and he he begs begs the the favour favour of of a a word.' word.' as as he he held held the the door door open open with with his his hand, hand, uriah uriah looked looked at at me, me, and and looked looked at at agnes, agnes, and and looked looked at at the the dishes, dishes, and and looked looked at at the the plates, plates, and and looked looked at at every every object object in in the the room, room, i i thought, thought, -- -- yet yet seemed seemed to to look look at at nothing; nothing; he he made made such such an an appearance appearance all all the the while while of of keeping keeping his his red red eyes eyes dutifully dutifully on on his his master. master. 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon. pardon. it's it's only only to to say, say, on on reflection,' reflection,' observed observed a a voice voice behind behind uriah, uriah, as as uriah's uriah's head head was was pushed pushed away, away, and and the the speaker's speaker's substituted substituted -- -- 'pray 'pray excuse excuse me me for for this this intrusion intrusion -- -- that that as as it it seems seems i i have have no no choice choice in in the the matter, matter, the the sooner sooner i i go go abroad abroad the the better. better. my my cousin cousin annie annie did did say, say, when when we we talked talked of of it, it, that that she she liked liked to to have have her her friends friends within within reach reach rather rather than than to to have have them them banished, banished, and and the the old old doctor doctor -- -- ' ' 'doctor 'doctor strong, strong, was was that?' that?' mr. mr. wickfield wickfield interposed, interposed, gravely. gravely. 'doctor 'doctor strong, strong, of of course,' course,' returned returned the the other; other; 'i 'i call call him him the the old old doctor; doctor; it's it's all all the the same, same, you know.' know.' 'i 'i don't don't know,' know,' returned returned mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'well, 'well, doctor doctor strong,' strong,' said said the the other other -- -- 'doctor 'doctor strong strong was was of of the the same same mind, mind, i i believed. believed. but but as as it it appears appears from from the the course course you take take with with me me he he has has changed changed his his mind, mind, why why there's there's no no more more to to be be said, said, except except that that the the sooner sooner i i am am off, off, the the better. better. therefore, therefore, i i thought thought i'd i'd come come back back and and say, say, that that the the sooner sooner i i am am off off the the better. better. when when a a plunge plunge is is to to be be made made into into the the water, water, it's it's of of no no use use lingering lingering on on the the bank.' bank.' 'there 'there shall shall be be as as little little lingering lingering as as possible, possible, in in your your case, case, mr. mr. maldon, maldon, you may may depend depend upon upon it,' it,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'thank'ee,' 'thank'ee,' said said the the other. other. 'much 'much obliged. obliged. i i don't don't want want to to look look a a gift-horse gift-horse in in the the mouth, mouth, which which is is not not a a gracious gracious thing thing to to do; do; otherwise, otherwise, i i dare dare say, say, my my cousin cousin annie annie could could easily easily arrange arrange it it in in her her own own way. way. i i suppose suppose annie annie would would only only have have to to say say to to the the old old doctor doctor -- -- ' ' 'meaning 'meaning that that mrs. mrs. strong strong would would only only have have to to say say to to her her husband husband -- -- do do i i follow follow you?' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'quite 'quite so,' so,' returned returned the the other, other, ' ' -- -- would would only only have have to to say, say, that that she she wanted wanted such such and and such such a a thing thing to to be be so so and and so; so; and and it it would would be be so so and and so, so, as as a a matter matter of of course.' course.' 'and 'and why why as as a a matter matter of of course, course, mr. mr. maldon?' maldon?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sedately sedately eating eating his his dinner. dinner. 'why, 'why, because because annie's annie's a a charming charming young young girl, girl, and and the the old old doctor doctor -- -- doctor doctor strong, strong, i i mean mean -- -- is is not not quite quite a a charming charming young young boy,' boy,' said said mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, laughing. laughing. 'no 'no offence offence to to anybody, anybody, mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. i i only only mean mean that that i i suppose suppose some some compensation compensation is is fair fair and and reasonable reasonable in in that that sort sort of of marriage.' marriage.' 'compensation 'compensation to to the the lady, lady, sir?' sir?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield wickfield gravely. gravely. 'to 'to the the lady, lady, sir,' sir,' mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon answered, answered, laughing. laughing. but but appearing appearing to to remark remark that that mr. mr. wickfield wickfield went went on on with with his his dinner dinner in in the the same same sedate, sedate, immovable immovable manner, manner, and and that that there there was was no no hope hope of of making making him him relax relax a a muscle muscle of of his his face, face, he he added: added: 'however, 'however, i i have have said said what what i i came came to to say, say, and, and, with with another another apology apology for for this this intrusion, intrusion, i i may may take take myself myself off. off. of of course course i i shall shall observe observe your your directions, directions, in in considering considering the the matter matter as as one one to to be be arranged arranged between between you and and me me solely, solely, and and not not to to be be referred referred to, to, up up at at the the doctor's.' doctor's.' 'have 'have you dined?' dined?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, with with a a motion motion of of his his hand hand towards towards the the table. table. 'thank'ee. 'thank'ee. i i am am going going to to dine,' dine,' said said mr. mr. maldon, maldon, 'with 'with my my cousin cousin annie. annie. good-bye!' good-bye!' mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, without without rising, rising, looked looked after after him him thoughtfully thoughtfully as as he he went went out. out. he he was was rather rather a a shallow shallow sort sort of of young young gentleman, gentleman, i i thought, thought, with with a a handsome handsome face, face, a a rapid rapid utterance, utterance, and and a a confident, confident, bold bold air. air. and and this this was was the the first first i i ever ever saw saw of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon; maldon; whom whom i i had had not not expected expected to to see see so so soon, soon, when when i i heard heard the the doctor doctor speak speak of of him him that that morning. morning. when when we we had had dined, dined, we we went went upstairs upstairs again, again, where where everything everything went went on on exactly exactly as as on on the the previous previous day. day. agnes agnes set set the the glasses glasses and and decanters decanters in in the the same same corner, corner, and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield sat sat down down to to drink, drink, and and drank drank a a good good deal. deal. agnes agnes played played the the piano piano to to him, him, sat sat by by him, him, and and worked worked and and talked, talked, and and played played some some games games at at dominoes dominoes with with me. me. in in good good time time she she made made tea; tea; and and afterwards, afterwards, when when i i brought brought down down my my books, books, looked looked into into them, them, and and showed showed me me what what she she knew knew of of them them (which (which was was no no slight slight matter, matter, though though she she said said it it was), was), and and what what was was the the best best way way to to learn learn and and understand understand them. them. i i see see her, her, with with her her modest, modest, orderly, orderly, placid placid manner, manner, and and i i hear hear her her beautiful beautiful calm calm voice, voice, as as i i write write these these words. words. the the influence influence for for all all good, good, which which she she came came to to exercise exercise over over me me at at a a later later time, time, begins begins already already to to descend descend upon upon my my breast. breast. i i love love little little em'ly, em'ly, and and i i don't don't love love agnes agnes -- -- no, no, not not at at all all in in that that way way -- -- but but i i feel feel that that there there are are goodness, goodness, peace, peace, and and truth, truth, wherever wherever agnes agnes is; is; and and that that the the soft soft light light of of the the coloured coloured window window in in the the church, church, seen seen long long ago, ago, falls falls on on her her always, always, and and on on me me when when i i am am near near her, her, and and on on everything everything around. around. the the time time having having come come for for her her withdrawal withdrawal for for the the night, night, and and she she having having left left us, us, i i gave gave mr. mr. wickfield wickfield my my hand, hand, preparatory preparatory to to going going away away myself. myself. but but he he checked checked me me and and said: said: 'should 'should you like like to to stay stay with with us, us, trotwood, trotwood, or or to to go go elsewhere?' elsewhere?' 'to 'to stay,' stay,' i i answered, answered, quickly. quickly. 'you are are sure?' sure?' 'if 'if you please. please. if if i i may!' may!' 'why, 'why, it's it's but but a a dull dull life life that that we we lead lead here, here, boy, boy, i i am am afraid,' afraid,' he he said. said. 'not 'not more more dull dull for for me me than than agnes, agnes, sir. sir. not not dull dull at at all!' all!' 'than 'than agnes,' agnes,' he he repeated, repeated, walking walking slowly slowly to to the the great great chimney-piece, chimney-piece, and and leaning leaning against against it. it. 'than 'than agnes!' agnes!' he he had had drank drank wine wine that that evening evening (or (or i i fancied fancied it), it), until until his his eyes eyes were were bloodshot. bloodshot. not not that that i i could could see see them them now, now, for for they they were were cast cast down, down, and and shaded shaded by by his his hand; hand; but but i i had had noticed noticed them them a a little little while while before. before. 'now 'now i i wonder,' wonder,' he he muttered, muttered, 'whether 'whether my my agnes agnes tires tires of of me. me. when when should should i i ever ever tire tire of of her! her! but but that's that's different, different, that's that's quite quite different.' different.' he he was was musing, musing, not not speaking speaking to to me; me; so so i i remained remained quiet. quiet. 'a 'a dull dull old old house,' house,' he he said, said, 'and 'and a a monotonous monotonous life; life; but but i i must must have have her her near near me. me. i i must must keep keep her her near near me. me. if if the the thought thought that that i i may may die die and and leave leave my my darling, darling, or or that that my my darling darling may may die die and and leave leave me, me, comes comes like like a a spectre, spectre, to to distress distress my my happiest happiest hours, hours, and and is is only only to to be be drowned drowned in in -- -- ' ' he he did did not not supply supply the the word; word; but but pacing pacing slowly slowly to to the the place place where where he he had had sat, sat, and and mechanically mechanically going going through through the the action action of of pouring pouring wine wine from from the the empty empty decanter, decanter, set set it it down down and and paced paced back back again. again. 'if 'if it it is is miserable miserable to to bear, bear, when when she she is is here,' here,' he he said, said, 'what 'what would would it it be, be, and and she she away? away? no, no, no, no, no. no. i i cannot cannot try try that.' that.' he he leaned leaned against against the the chimney-piece, chimney-piece, brooding brooding so so long long that that i i could could not not decide decide whether whether to to run run the the risk risk of of disturbing disturbing him him by by going, going, or or to to remain remain quietly quietly where where i i was, was, until until he he should should come come out out of of his his reverie. reverie. at at length length he he aroused aroused himself, himself, and and looked looked about about the the room room until until his his eyes eyes encountered encountered mine. mine. 'stay 'stay with with us, us, trotwood, trotwood, eh?' eh?' he he said said in in his his usual usual manner, manner, and and as as if if he he were were answering answering something something i i had had just just said. said. 'i 'i am am glad glad of of it. it. you are are company company to to us us both. both. it it is is wholesome wholesome to to have have you here. here. wholesome wholesome for for me, me, wholesome wholesome for for agnes, agnes, wholesome wholesome perhaps perhaps for for all all of of us.' us.' 'i 'i am am sure sure it it is is for for me, me, sir,' sir,' i i said. said. 'i 'i am am so so glad glad to to be be here.' here.' 'that's 'that's a a fine fine fellow!' fellow!' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'as 'as long long as as you are are glad glad to to be be here, here, you shall shall stay stay here.' here.' he he shook shook hands hands with with me me upon upon it, it, and and clapped clapped me me on on the the back; back; and and told told me me that that when when i i had had anything anything to to do do at at night night after after agnes agnes had had left left us, us, or or when when i i wished wished to to read read for for my my own own pleasure, pleasure, i i was was free free to to come come down down to to his his room, room, if if he he were were there there and and if if i i desired desired it it for for company's company's sake, sake, and and to to sit sit with with him. him. i i thanked thanked him him for for his his consideration; consideration; and, and, as as he he went went down down soon soon afterwards, afterwards, and and i i was was not not tired, tired, went went down down too, too, with with a a book book in in my my hand, hand, to to avail avail myself, myself, for for half-an-hour, half-an-hour, of of his his permission. permission. but, but, seeing seeing a a light light in in the the little little round round office, office, and and immediately immediately feeling feeling myself myself attracted attracted towards towards uriah uriah heep, heep, who who had had a a sort sort of of fascination fascination for for me, me, i i went went in in there there instead. instead. i i found found uriah uriah reading reading a a great great fat fat book, book, with with such such demonstrative demonstrative attention, attention, that that his his lank lank forefinger forefinger followed followed up up every every line line as as he he read, read, and and made made clammy clammy tracks tracks along along the the page page (or (or so so i i fully fully believed) believed) like like a a snail. snail. 'you are are working working late late tonight, tonight, uriah,' uriah,' says says i. i. 'yes, 'yes, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' says says uriah. uriah. as as i i was was getting getting on on the the stool stool opposite, opposite, to to talk talk to to him him more more conveniently, conveniently, i i observed observed that that he he had had not not such such a a thing thing as as a a smile smile about about him, him, and and that that he he could could only only widen widen his his mouth mouth and and make make two two hard hard creases creases down down his his cheeks, cheeks, one one on on each each side, side, to to stand stand for for one. one. 'i 'i am am not not doing doing office-work, office-work, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'what 'what work, work, then?' then?' i i asked. asked. 'i 'i am am improving improving my my legal legal knowledge, knowledge, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'i 'i am am going going through through tidd's tidd's practice. practice. oh, oh, what what a a writer writer mr. mr. tidd tidd is, is, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' my my stool stool was was such such a a tower tower of of observation, observation, that that as as i i watched watched him him reading reading on on again, again, after after this this rapturous rapturous exclamation, exclamation, and and following following up up the the lines lines with with his his forefinger, forefinger, i i observed observed that that his his nostrils, nostrils, which which were were thin thin and and pointed, pointed, with with sharp sharp dints dints in in them, them, had had a a singular singular and and most most uncomfortable uncomfortable way way of of expanding expanding and and contracting contracting themselves themselves -- -- that that they they seemed seemed to to twinkle twinkle instead instead of of his his eyes, eyes, which which hardly hardly ever ever twinkled twinkled at at all. all. 'i 'i suppose suppose you are are quite quite a a great great lawyer?' lawyer?' i i said, said, after after looking looking at at him him for for some some time. time. 'me, 'me, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' said said uriah. uriah. 'oh, 'oh, no! no! i'm i'm a a very very umble umble person.' person.' it it was was no no fancy fancy of of mine mine about about his his hands, hands, i i observed; observed; for for he he frequently frequently ground ground the the palms palms against against each each other other as as if if to to squeeze squeeze them them dry dry and and warm, warm, besides besides often often wiping wiping them, them, in in a a stealthy stealthy way, way, on on his his pocket-handkerchief. pocket-handkerchief. 'i 'i am am well well aware aware that that i i am am the the umblest umblest person person going,' going,' said said uriah uriah heep, heep, modestly; modestly; 'let 'let the the other other be be where where he he may. may. my my mother mother is is likewise likewise a a very very umble umble person. person. we we live live in in a a numble numble abode, abode, master master copperfield, copperfield, but but have have much much to to be be thankful thankful for. for. my my father's father's former former calling calling was was umble. umble. he he was was a a sexton.' sexton.' 'what 'what is is he he now?' now?' i i asked. asked. 'he 'he is is a a partaker partaker of of glory glory at at present, present, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah uriah heep. heep. 'but 'but we we have have much much to to be be thankful thankful for. for. how how much much have have i i to to be be thankful thankful for for in in living living with with mr. mr. wickfield!' wickfield!' i i asked asked uriah uriah if if he he had had been been with with mr. mr. wickfield wickfield long? long? 'i 'i have have been been with with him, him, going going on on four four year, year, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah; uriah; shutting shutting up up his his book, book, after after carefully carefully marking marking the the place place where where he he had had left left off. off. 'since 'since a a year year after after my my father's father's death. death. how how much much have have i i to to be be thankful thankful for, for, in in that! that! how how much much have have i i to to be be thankful thankful for, for, in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's kind kind intention intention to to give give me me my my articles, articles, which which would would otherwise otherwise not not lay lay within within the the umble umble means means of of mother mother and and self!' self!' 'then, 'then, when when your your articled articled time time is is over, over, you'll you'll be be a a regular regular lawyer, lawyer, i i suppose?' suppose?' said said i. i. 'with 'with the the blessing blessing of of providence, providence, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned uriah. uriah. 'perhaps 'perhaps you'll you'll be be a a partner partner in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's business, business, one one of of these these days,' days,' i i said, said, to to make make myself myself agreeable; agreeable; 'and 'and it it will will be be wickfield wickfield and and heep, heep, or or heep heep late late wickfield.' wickfield.' 'oh 'oh no, no, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned uriah, uriah, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'i 'i am am much much too too umble umble for for that!' that!' he he certainly certainly did did look look uncommonly uncommonly like like the the carved carved face face on on the the beam beam outside outside my my window, window, as as he he sat, sat, in in his his humility, humility, eyeing eyeing me me sideways, sideways, with with his his mouth mouth widened, widened, and and the the creases creases in in his his cheeks. cheeks. 'mr. 'mr. wickfield wickfield is is a a most most excellent excellent man, man, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'if 'if you have have known known him him long, long, you know know it, it, i i am am sure, sure, much much better better than than i i can can inform inform you.' i i replied replied that that i i was was certain certain he he was; was; but but that that i i had had not not known known him him long long myself, myself, though though he he was was a a friend friend of of my my aunt's. aunt's. 'oh, 'oh, indeed, indeed, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'your 'your aunt aunt is is a a sweet sweet lady, lady, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' he he had had a a way way of of writhing writhing when when he he wanted wanted to to express express enthusiasm, enthusiasm, which which was was very very ugly; ugly; and and which which diverted diverted my my attention attention from from the the compliment compliment he he had had paid paid my my relation, relation, to to the the snaky snaky twistings twistings of of his his throat throat and and body. body. 'a 'a sweet sweet lady, lady, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' said said uriah uriah heep. heep. 'she 'she has has a a great great admiration admiration for for miss miss agnes, agnes, master master copperfield, copperfield, i i believe?' believe?' i i said, said, 'yes,' 'yes,' boldly; boldly; not not that that i i knew knew anything anything about about it, it, heaven heaven forgive forgive me! me! 'i 'i hope hope you have, have, too, too, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'but 'but i i am am sure sure you must must have.' have.' 'everybody 'everybody must must have,' have,' i i returned. returned. 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah uriah heep, heep, 'for 'for that that remark! remark! it it is is so so true! true! umble umble as as i i am, am, i i know know it it is is so so true! true! oh, oh, thank thank you, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' he he writhed writhed himself himself quite quite off off his his stool stool in in the the excitement excitement of of his his feelings, feelings, and, and, being being off, off, began began to to make make arrangements arrangements for for going going home. home. 'mother 'mother will will be be expecting expecting me,' me,' he he said, said, referring referring to to a a pale, pale, inexpressive-faced inexpressive-faced watch watch in in his his pocket, pocket, 'and 'and getting getting uneasy; uneasy; for for though though we we are are very very umble, umble, master master copperfield, copperfield, we we are are much much attached attached to to one one another. another. if if you would would come come and and see see us, us, any any afternoon, afternoon, and and take take a a cup cup of of tea tea at at our our lowly lowly dwelling, dwelling, mother mother would would be be as as proud proud of of your your company company as as i i should should be.' be.' i i said said i i should should be be glad glad to to come. come. 'thank 'thank you, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned uriah, uriah, putting putting his his book book away away upon upon the the shelf shelf -- -- 'i 'i suppose suppose you stop stop here, here, some some time, time, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' i i said said i i was was going going to to be be brought brought up up there, there, i i believed, believed, as as long long as as i i remained remained at at school. school. 'oh, 'oh, indeed!' indeed!' exclaimed exclaimed uriah. uriah. 'i 'i should should think think you would would come come into into the the business business at at last, last, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' i i protested protested that that i i had had no no views views of of that that sort, sort, and and that that no no such such scheme scheme was was entertained entertained in in my my behalf behalf by by anybody; anybody; but but uriah uriah insisted insisted on on blandly blandly replying replying to to all all my my assurances, assurances, 'oh, 'oh, yes, yes, master master copperfield, copperfield, i i should should think think you would, would, indeed!' indeed!' and, and, 'oh, 'oh, indeed, indeed, master master copperfield, copperfield, i i should should think think you would, would, certainly!' certainly!' over over and and over over again. again. being, being, at at last, last, ready ready to to leave leave the the office office for for the the night, night, he he asked asked me me if if it it would would suit suit my my convenience convenience to to have have the the light light put put out; out; and and on on my my answering answering 'yes,' 'yes,' instantly instantly extinguished extinguished it. it. after after shaking shaking hands hands with with me me -- -- his his hand hand felt felt like like a a fish, fish, in in the the dark dark -- -- he he opened opened the the door door into into the the street street a a very very little, little, and and crept crept out, out, and and shut shut it, it, leaving leaving me me to to grope grope my my way way back back into into the the house: house: which which cost cost me me some some trouble trouble and and a a fall fall over over his his stool. stool. this this was was the the proximate proximate cause, cause, i i suppose, suppose, of of my my dreaming dreaming about about him, him, for for what what appeared appeared to to me me to to be be half half the the night; night; and and dreaming, dreaming, among among other other things, things, that that he he had had launched launched mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's house house on on a a piratical piratical expedition, expedition, with with a a black black flag flag at at the the masthead, masthead, bearing bearing the the inscription inscription 'tidd's 'tidd's practice', practice', under under which which diabolical diabolical ensign ensign he he was was carrying carrying me me and and little little em'ly em'ly to to the the spanish spanish main, main, to to be be drowned. drowned. i i got got a a little little the the better better of of my my uneasiness uneasiness when when i i went went to to school school next next day, day, and and a a good good deal deal the the better better next next day, day, and and so so shook shook it it off off by by degrees, degrees, that that in in less less than than a a fortnight fortnight i i was was quite quite at at home, home, and and happy, happy, among among my my new new companions. companions. i i was was awkward awkward enough enough in in their their games, games, and and backward backward enough enough in in their their studies; studies; but but custom custom would would improve improve me me in in the the first first respect, respect, i i hoped, hoped, and and hard hard work work in in the the second. second. accordingly, accordingly, i i went went to to work work very very hard, hard, both both in in play play and and in in earnest, earnest, and and gained gained great great commendation. commendation. and, and, in in a a very very little little while, while, the the murdstone murdstone and and grinby grinby life life became became so so strange strange to to me me that that i i hardly hardly believed believed in in it, it, while while my my present present life life grew grew so so familiar, familiar, that that i i seemed seemed to to have have been been leading leading it it a a long long time. time. doctor doctor strong's strong's was was an an excellent excellent school; school; as as different different from from mr. mr. creakle's creakle's as as good good is is from from evil. evil. it it was was very very gravely gravely and and decorously decorously ordered, ordered, and and on on a a sound sound system; system; with with an an appeal, appeal, in in everything, everything, to to the the honour honour and and good good faith faith of of the the boys, boys, and and an an avowed avowed intention intention to to rely rely on on their their possession possession of of those those qualities qualities unless unless they they proved proved themselves themselves unworthy unworthy of of it, it, which which worked worked wonders. wonders. we we all all felt felt that that we we had had a a part part in in the the management management of of the the place, place, and and in in sustaining sustaining its its character character and and dignity. dignity. hence, hence, we we soon soon became became warmly warmly attached attached to to it it -- -- i i am am sure sure i i did did for for one, one, and and i i never never knew, knew, in in all all my my time, time, of of any any other other boy boy being being otherwise otherwise -- -- and and learnt learnt with with a a good good will, will, desiring desiring to to do do it it credit. credit. we we had had noble noble games games out out of of hours, hours, and and plenty plenty of of liberty; liberty; but but even even then, then, as as i i remember, remember, we we were were well well spoken spoken of of in in the the town, town, and and rarely rarely did did any any disgrace, disgrace, by by our our appearance appearance or or manner, manner, to to the the reputation reputation of of doctor doctor strong strong and and doctor doctor strong's strong's boys. boys. some some of of the the higher higher scholars scholars boarded boarded in in the the doctor's doctor's house, house, and and through through them them i i learned, learned, at at second second hand, hand, some some particulars particulars of of the the doctor's doctor's history history -- -- as, as, how how he he had had not not yet yet been been married married twelve twelve months months to to the the beautiful beautiful young young lady lady i i had had seen seen in in the the study, study, whom whom he he had had married married for for love; love; for for she she had had not not a a sixpence, sixpence, and and had had a a world world of of poor poor relations relations (so (so our our fellows fellows said) said) ready ready to to swarm swarm the the doctor doctor out out of of house house and and home. home. also, also, how how the the doctor's doctor's cogitating cogitating manner manner was was attributable attributable to to his his being being always always engaged engaged in in looking looking out out for for greek greek roots; roots; which, which, in in my my innocence innocence and and ignorance, ignorance, i i supposed supposed to to be be a a botanical botanical furor furor on on the the doctor's doctor's part, part, especially especially as as he he always always looked looked at at the the ground ground when when he he walked walked about, about, until until i i understood understood that that they they were were roots roots of of words, words, with with a a view view to to a a new new dictionary dictionary which which he he had had in in contemplation. contemplation. adams, adams, our our head-boy, head-boy, who who had had a a turn turn for for mathematics, mathematics, had had made made a a calculation, calculation, i i was was informed, informed, of of the the time time this this dictionary dictionary would would take take in in completing, completing, on on the the doctor's doctor's plan, plan, and and at at the the doctor's doctor's rate rate of of going. going. he he considered considered that that it it might might be be done done in in one one thousand thousand six six hundred hundred and and forty-nine forty-nine years, years, counting counting from from the the doctor's doctor's last, last, or or sixty-second, sixty-second, birthday. birthday. but but the the doctor doctor himself himself was was the the idol idol of of the the whole whole school: school: and and it it must must have have been been a a badly badly composed composed school school if if he he had had been been anything anything else, else, for for he he was was the the kindest kindest of of men; men; with with a a simple simple faith faith in in him him that that might might have have touched touched the the stone stone hearts hearts of of the the very very urns urns upon upon the the wall. wall. as as he he walked walked up up and and down down that that part part of of the the courtyard courtyard which which was was at at the the side side of of the the house, house, with with the the stray stray rooks rooks and and jackdaws jackdaws looking looking after after him him with with their their heads heads cocked cocked slyly, slyly, as as if if they they knew knew how how much much more more knowing knowing they they were were in in worldly worldly affairs affairs than than he, he, if if any any sort sort of of vagabond vagabond could could only only get get near near enough enough to to his his creaking creaking shoes shoes to to attract attract his his attention attention to to one one sentence sentence of of a a tale tale of of distress, distress, that that vagabond vagabond was was made made for for the the next next two two days. days. it it was was so so notorious notorious in in the the house, house, that that the the masters masters and and head-boys head-boys took took pains pains to to cut cut these these marauders marauders off off at at angles, angles, and and to to get get out out of of windows, windows, and and turn turn them them out out of of the the courtyard, courtyard, before before they they could could make make the the doctor doctor aware aware of of their their presence; presence; which which was was sometimes sometimes happily happily effected effected within within a a few few yards yards of of him, him, without without his his knowing knowing anything anything of of the the matter, matter, as as he he jogged jogged to to and and fro. fro. outside outside his his own own domain, domain, and and unprotected, unprotected, he he was was a a very very sheep sheep for for the the shearers. shearers. he he would would have have taken taken his his gaiters gaiters off off his his legs, legs, to to give give away. away. in in fact, fact, there there was was a a story story current current among among us us (i (i have have no no idea, idea, and and never never had, had, on on what what authority, authority, but but i i have have believed believed it it for for so so many many years years that that i i feel feel quite quite certain certain it it is is true), true), that that on on a a frosty frosty day, day, one one winter-time, winter-time, he he actually actually did did bestow bestow his his gaiters gaiters on on a a beggar-woman, beggar-woman, who who occasioned occasioned some some scandal scandal in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood by by exhibiting exhibiting a a fine fine infant infant from from door door to to door, door, wrapped wrapped in in those those garments, garments, which which were were universally universally recognized, recognized, being being as as well well known known in in the the vicinity vicinity as as the the cathedral. cathedral. the the legend legend added added that that the the only only person person who who did did not not identify identify them them was was the the doctor doctor himself, himself, who, who, when when they they were were shortly shortly afterwards afterwards displayed displayed at at the the door door of of a a little little second-hand second-hand shop shop of of no no very very good good repute, repute, where where such such things things were were taken taken in in exchange exchange for for gin, gin, was was more more than than once once observed observed to to handle handle them them approvingly, approvingly, as as if if admiring admiring some some curious curious novelty novelty in in the the pattern, pattern, and and considering considering them them an an improvement improvement on on his his own. own. it it was was very very pleasant pleasant to to see see the the doctor doctor with with his his pretty pretty young young wife. wife. he he had had a a fatherly, fatherly, benignant benignant way way of of showing showing his his fondness fondness for for her, her, which which seemed seemed in in itself itself to to express express a a good good man. man. i i often often saw saw them them walking walking in in the the garden garden where where the the peaches peaches were, were, and and i i sometimes sometimes had had a a nearer nearer observation observation of of them them in in the the study study or or the the parlour. parlour. she she appeared appeared to to me me to to take take great great care care of of the the doctor, doctor, and and to to like like him him very very much, much, though though i i never never thought thought her her vitally vitally interested interested in in the the dictionary: dictionary: some some cumbrous cumbrous fragments fragments of of which which work work the the doctor doctor always always carried carried in in his his pockets, pockets, and and in in the the lining lining of of his his hat, hat, and and generally generally seemed seemed to to be be expounding expounding to to her her as as they they walked walked about. about. i i saw saw a a good good deal deal of of mrs. mrs. strong, strong, both both because because she she had had taken taken a a liking liking for for me me on on the the morning morning of of my my introduction introduction to to the the doctor, doctor, and and was was always always afterwards afterwards kind kind to to me, me, and and interested interested in in me; me; and and because because she she was was very very fond fond of of agnes, agnes, and and was was often often backwards backwards and and forwards forwards at at our our house. house. there there was was a a curious curious constraint constraint between between her her and and mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, i i thought thought (of (of whom whom she she seemed seemed to to be be afraid), afraid), that that never never wore wore off. off. when when she she came came there there of of an an evening, evening, she she always always shrunk shrunk from from accepting accepting his his escort escort home, home, and and ran ran away away with with me me instead. instead. and and sometimes, sometimes, as as we we were were running running gaily gaily across across the the cathedral cathedral yard yard together, together, expecting expecting to to meet meet nobody, nobody, we we would would meet meet mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, who who was was always always surprised surprised to to see see us. us. mrs. mrs. strong's strong's mama mama was was a a lady lady i i took took great great delight delight in. in. her her name name was was mrs. mrs. markleham; markleham; but but our our boys boys used used to to call call her her the the old old soldier, soldier, on on account account of of her her generalship, generalship, and and the the skill skill with with which which she she marshalled marshalled great great forces forces of of relations relations against against the the doctor. doctor. she she was was a a little, little, sharp-eyed sharp-eyed woman, woman, who who used used to to wear, wear, when when she she was was dressed, dressed, one one unchangeable unchangeable cap, cap, ornamented ornamented with with some some artificial artificial flowers, flowers, and and two two artificial artificial butterflies butterflies supposed supposed to to be be hovering hovering above above the the flowers. flowers. there there was was a a superstition superstition among among us us that that this this cap cap had had come come from from france, france, and and could could only only originate originate in in the the workmanship workmanship of of that that ingenious ingenious nation: nation: but but all all i i certainly certainly know know about about it, it, is, is, that that it it always always made made its its appearance appearance of of an an evening, evening, wheresoever wheresoever mrs. mrs. markleham markleham made made her her appearance; appearance; that that it it was was carried carried about about to to friendly friendly meetings meetings in in a a hindoo hindoo basket; basket; that that the the butterflies butterflies had had the the gift gift of of trembling trembling constantly; constantly; and and that that they they improved improved the the shining shining hours hours at at doctor doctor strong's strong's expense, expense, like like busy busy bees. bees. i i observed observed the the old old soldier soldier -- -- not not to to adopt adopt the the name name disrespectfully disrespectfully -- -- to to pretty pretty good good advantage, advantage, on on a a night night which which is is made made memorable memorable to to me me by by something something else else i i shall shall relate. relate. it it was was the the night night of of a a little little party party at at the the doctor's, doctor's, which which was was given given on on the the occasion occasion of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon's maldon's departure departure for for india, india, whither whither he he was was going going as as a a cadet, cadet, or or something something of of that that kind: kind: mr. mr. wickfield wickfield having having at at length length arranged arranged the the business. business. it it happened happened to to be be the the doctor's doctor's birthday, birthday, too. too. we we had had had had a a holiday, holiday, had had made made presents presents to to him him in in the the morning, morning, had had made made a a speech speech to to him him through through the the head-boy, head-boy, and and had had cheered cheered him him until until we we were were hoarse, hoarse, and and until until he he had had shed shed tears. tears. and and now, now, in in the the evening, evening, mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, agnes, agnes, and and i, i, went went to to have have tea tea with with him him in in his his private private capacity. capacity. mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon was was there, there, before before us. us. mrs. mrs. strong, strong, dressed dressed in in white, white, with with cherry-coloured cherry-coloured ribbons, ribbons, was was playing playing the the piano, piano, when when we we went went in; in; and and he he was was leaning leaning over over her her to to turn turn the the leaves. leaves. the the clear clear red red and and white white of of her her complexion complexion was was not not so so blooming blooming and and flower-like flower-like as as usual, usual, i i thought, thought, when when she she turned turned round; round; but but she she looked looked very very pretty, pretty, wonderfully wonderfully pretty. pretty. 'i 'i have have forgotten, forgotten, doctor,' doctor,' said said mrs. mrs. strong's strong's mama, mama, when when we we were were seated, seated, 'to 'to pay pay you the the compliments compliments of of the the day day -- -- though though they they are, are, as as you may may suppose, suppose, very very far far from from being being mere mere compliments compliments in in my my case. case. allow allow me me to to wish wish you many many happy happy returns.' returns.' 'i 'i thank thank you, ma'am,' ma'am,' replied replied the the doctor. doctor. 'many, 'many, many, many, many, many, happy happy returns,' returns,' said said the the old old soldier. soldier. 'not 'not only only for for your your own own sake, sake, but but for for annie's, annie's, and and john john maldon's, maldon's, and and many many other other people's. people's. it it seems seems but but yesterday yesterday to to me, me, john, john, when when you were were a a little little creature, creature, a a head head shorter shorter than than master master copperfield, copperfield, making making baby baby love love to to annie annie behind behind the the gooseberry gooseberry bushes bushes in in the the back-garden.' back-garden.' 'my 'my dear dear mama,' mama,' said said mrs. mrs. strong, strong, 'never 'never mind mind that that now.' now.' 'annie, 'annie, don't don't be be absurd,' absurd,' returned returned her her mother. mother. 'if 'if you are are to to blush blush to to hear hear of of such such things things now now you are are an an old old married married woman, woman, when when are are you not not to to blush blush to to hear hear of of them?' them?' 'old?' 'old?' exclaimed exclaimed mr. mr. jack jack maldon. maldon. 'annie? 'annie? come!' come!' 'yes, 'yes, john,' john,' returned returned the the soldier. soldier. 'virtually, 'virtually, an an old old married married woman. woman. although although not not old old by by years years -- -- for for when when did did you ever ever hear hear me me say, say, or or who who has has ever ever heard heard me me say, say, that that a a girl girl of of twenty twenty was was old old by by years! years! -- -- your your cousin cousin is is the the wife wife of of the the doctor, doctor, and, and, as as such, such, what what i i have have described described her. her. it it is is well well for for you, john, john, that that your your cousin cousin is is the the wife wife of of the the doctor. doctor. you have have found found in in him him an an influential influential and and kind kind friend, friend, who who will will be be kinder kinder yet, yet, i i venture venture to to predict, predict, if if you deserve deserve it. it. i i have have no no false false pride. pride. i i never never hesitate hesitate to to admit, admit, frankly, frankly, that that there there are are some some members members of of our our family family who who want want a a friend. friend. you were were one one yourself, yourself, before before your your cousin's cousin's influence influence raised raised up up one one for for you.' the the doctor, doctor, in in the the goodness goodness of of his his heart, heart, waved waved his his hand hand as as if if to to make make light light of of it, it, and and save save mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon from from any any further further reminder. reminder. but but mrs. mrs. markleham markleham changed changed her her chair chair for for one one next next the the doctor's, doctor's, and and putting putting her her fan fan on on his his coat-sleeve, coat-sleeve, said: said: 'no, 'no, really, really, my my dear dear doctor, doctor, you must must excuse excuse me me if if i i appear appear to to dwell dwell on on this this rather, rather, because because i i feel feel so so very very strongly. strongly. i i call call it it quite quite my my monomania, monomania, it it is is such such a a subject subject of of mine. mine. you are are a a blessing blessing to to us. us. you really really are are a a boon, boon, you know.' know.' 'nonsense, 'nonsense, nonsense,' nonsense,' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'no, 'no, no, no, i i beg beg your your pardon,' pardon,' retorted retorted the the old old soldier. soldier. 'with 'with nobody nobody present, present, but but our our dear dear and and confidential confidential friend friend mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, i i cannot cannot consent consent to to be be put put down. down. i i shall shall begin begin to to assert assert the the privileges privileges of of a a mother-in-law, mother-in-law, if if you go go on on like like that, that, and and scold scold you. i i am am perfectly perfectly honest honest and and outspoken. outspoken. what what i i am am saying, saying, is is what what i i said said when when you first first overpowered overpowered me me with with surprise surprise -- -- you remember remember how how surprised surprised i i was? was? -- -- by by proposing proposing for for annie. annie. not not that that there there was was anything anything so so very very much much out out of of the the way, way, in in the the mere mere fact fact of of the the proposal proposal -- -- it it would would be be ridiculous ridiculous to to say say that! that! -- -- but but because, because, you having having known known her her poor poor father, father, and and having having known known her her from from a a baby baby six six months months old, old, i i hadn't hadn't thought thought of of you in in such such a a light light at at all, all, or or indeed indeed as as a a marrying marrying man man in in any any way, way, -- -- simply simply that, that, you know.' know.' 'aye, 'aye, aye,' aye,' returned returned the the doctor, doctor, good-humouredly. good-humouredly. 'never 'never mind.' mind.' 'but 'but i i do do mind,' mind,' said said the the old old soldier, soldier, laying laying her her fan fan upon upon his his lips. lips. 'i 'i mind mind very very much. much. i i recall recall these these things things that that i i may may be be contradicted contradicted if if i i am am wrong. wrong. well! well! then then i i spoke spoke to to annie, annie, and and i i told told her her what what had had happened. happened. i i said, said, "my "my dear, dear, here's here's doctor doctor strong strong has has positively positively been been and and made made you the the subject subject of of a a handsome handsome declaration declaration and and an an offer." offer." did did i i press press it it in in the the least? least? no. no. i i said, said, "now, "now, annie, annie, tell tell me me the the truth truth this this moment; moment; is is your your heart heart free?" free?" "mama," "mama," she she said said crying, crying, "i "i am am extremely extremely young" young" -- -- which which was was perfectly perfectly true true -- -- "and "and i i hardly hardly know know if if i i have have a a heart heart at at all." all." "then, "then, my my dear," dear," i i said, said, "you may may rely rely upon upon it, it, it's it's free. free. at at all all events, events, my my love," love," said said i, i, "doctor "doctor strong strong is is in in an an agitated agitated state state of of mind, mind, and and must must be be answered. answered. he he cannot cannot be be kept kept in in his his present present state state of of suspense." suspense." "mama," "mama," said said annie, annie, still still crying, crying, "would "would he he be be unhappy unhappy without without me? me? if if he he would, would, i i honour honour and and respect respect him him so so much, much, that that i i think think i i will will have have him." him." so so it it was was settled. settled. and and then, then, and and not not till till then, then, i i said said to to annie, annie, "annie, "annie, doctor doctor strong strong will will not not only only be be your your husband, husband, but but he he will will represent represent your your late late father: father: he he will will represent represent the the head head of of our our family, family, he he will will represent represent the the wisdom wisdom and and station, station, and and i i may may say say the the means, means, of of our our family; family; and and will will be, be, in in short, short, a a boon boon to to it." it." i i used used the the word word at at the the time, time, and and i i have have used used it it again, again, today. today. if if i i have have any any merit merit it it is is consistency.' consistency.' the the daughter daughter had had sat sat quite quite silent silent and and still still during during this this speech, speech, with with her her eyes eyes fixed fixed on on the the ground; ground; her her cousin cousin standing standing near near her, her, and and looking looking on on the the ground ground too. too. she she now now said said very very softly, softly, in in a a trembling trembling voice: voice: 'mama, 'mama, i i hope hope you have have finished?' finished?' 'no, 'no, my my dear dear annie,' annie,' returned returned the the old old soldier, soldier, 'i 'i have have not not quite quite finished. finished. since since you ask ask me, me, my my love, love, i i reply reply that that i i have have not. not. i i complain complain that that you really really are are a a little little unnatural unnatural towards towards your your own own family; family; and, and, as as it it is is of of no no use use complaining complaining to to you. i i mean mean to to complain complain to to your your husband. husband. now, now, my my dear dear doctor, doctor, do do look look at at that that silly silly wife wife of of yours.' yours.' as as the the doctor doctor turned turned his his kind kind face, face, with with its its smile smile of of simplicity simplicity and and gentleness, gentleness, towards towards her, her, she she drooped drooped her her head head more. more. i i noticed noticed that that mr. mr. wickfield wickfield looked looked at at her her steadily. steadily. 'when 'when i i happened happened to to say say to to that that naughty naughty thing, thing, the the other other day,' day,' pursued pursued her her mother, mother, shaking shaking her her head head and and her her fan fan at at her, her, playfully, playfully, 'that 'that there there was was a a family family circumstance circumstance she she might might mention mention to to you -- -- indeed, indeed, i i think, think, was was bound bound to to mention mention -- -- she she said, said, that that to to mention mention it it was was to to ask ask a a favour; favour; and and that, that, as as you were were too too generous, generous, and and as as for for her her to to ask ask was was always always to to have, have, she she wouldn't.' wouldn't.' 'annie, 'annie, my my dear,' dear,' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'that 'that was was wrong. wrong. it it robbed robbed me me of of a a pleasure.' pleasure.' 'almost 'almost the the very very words words i i said said to to her!' her!' exclaimed exclaimed her her mother. mother. 'now 'now really, really, another another time, time, when when i i know know what what she she would would tell tell you but but for for this this reason, reason, and and won't, won't, i i have have a a great great mind, mind, my my dear dear doctor, doctor, to to tell tell you myself.' myself.' 'i 'i shall shall be be glad glad if if you will,' will,' returned returned the the doctor. doctor. 'shall 'shall i?' i?' 'certainly.' 'certainly.' 'well, 'well, then, then, i i will!' will!' said said the the old old soldier. soldier. 'that's 'that's a a bargain.' bargain.' and and having, having, i i suppose, suppose, carried carried her her point, point, she she tapped tapped the the doctor's doctor's hand hand several several times times with with her her fan fan (which (which she she kissed kissed first), first), and and returned returned triumphantly triumphantly to to her her former former station. station. some some more more company company coming coming in, in, among among whom whom were were the the two two masters masters and and adams, adams, the the talk talk became became general; general; and and it it naturally naturally turned turned on on mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, and and his his voyage, voyage, and and the the country country he he was was going going to, to, and and his his various various plans plans and and prospects. prospects. he he was was to to leave leave that that night, night, after after supper, supper, in in a a post-chaise, post-chaise, for for gravesend; gravesend; where where the the ship, ship, in in which which he he was was to to make make the the voyage, voyage, lay; lay; and and was was to to be be gone gone -- -- unless unless he he came came home home on on leave, leave, or or for for his his health health -- -- i i don't don't know know how how many many years. years. i i recollect recollect it it was was settled settled by by general general consent consent that that india india was was quite quite a a misrepresented misrepresented country, country, and and had had nothing nothing objectionable objectionable in in it, it, but but a a tiger tiger or or two, two, and and a a little little heat heat in in the the warm warm part part of of the the day. day. for for my my own own part, part, i i looked looked on on mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon as as a a modern modern sindbad, sindbad, and and pictured pictured him him the the bosom bosom friend friend of of all all the the rajahs rajahs in in the the east, east, sitting sitting under under canopies, canopies, smoking smoking curly curly golden golden pipes pipes -- -- a a mile mile long, long, if if they they could could be be straightened straightened out. out. mrs. mrs. strong strong was was a a very very pretty pretty singer: singer: as as i i knew, knew, who who often often heard heard her her singing singing by by herself. herself. but, but, whether whether she she was was afraid afraid of of singing singing before before people, people, or or was was out out of of voice voice that that evening, evening, it it was was certain certain that that she she couldn't couldn't sing sing at at all. all. she she tried tried a a duet, duet, once, once, with with her her cousin cousin maldon, maldon, but but could could not not so so much much as as begin; begin; and and afterwards, afterwards, when when she she tried tried to to sing sing by by herself, herself, although although she she began began sweetly, sweetly, her her voice voice died died away away on on a a sudden, sudden, and and left left her her quite quite distressed, distressed, with with her her head head hanging hanging down down over over the the keys. keys. the the good good doctor doctor said said she she was was nervous, nervous, and, and, to to relieve relieve her, her, proposed proposed a a round round game game at at cards; cards; of of which which he he knew knew as as much much as as of of the the art art of of playing playing the the trombone. trombone. but but i i remarked remarked that that the the old old soldier soldier took took him him into into custody custody directly, directly, for for her her partner; partner; and and instructed instructed him, him, as as the the first first preliminary preliminary of of initiation, initiation, to to give give her her all all the the silver silver he he had had in in his his pocket. pocket. we we had had a a merry merry game, game, not not made made the the less less merry merry by by the the doctor's doctor's mistakes, mistakes, of of which which he he committed committed an an innumerable innumerable quantity, quantity, in in spite spite of of the the watchfulness watchfulness of of the the butterflies, butterflies, and and to to their their great great aggravation. aggravation. mrs. mrs. strong strong had had declined declined to to play, play, on on the the ground ground of of not not feeling feeling very very well; well; and and her her cousin cousin maldon maldon had had excused excused himself himself because because he he had had some some packing packing to to do. do. when when he he had had done done it, it, however, however, he he returned, returned, and and they they sat sat together, together, talking, talking, on on the the sofa. sofa. from from time time to to time time she she came came and and looked looked over over the the doctor's doctor's hand, hand, and and told told him him what what to to play. play. she she was was very very pale, pale, as as she she bent bent over over him, him, and and i i thought thought her her finger finger trembled trembled as as she she pointed pointed out out the the cards; cards; but but the the doctor doctor was was quite quite happy happy in in her her attention, attention, and and took took no no notice notice of of this, this, if if it it were were so. so. at at supper, supper, we we were were hardly hardly so so gay. gay. everyone everyone appeared appeared to to feel feel that that a a parting parting of of that that sort sort was was an an awkward awkward thing, thing, and and that that the the nearer nearer it it approached, approached, the the more more awkward awkward it it was. was. mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon tried tried to to be be very very talkative, talkative, but but was was not not at at his his ease, ease, and and made made matters matters worse. worse. and and they they were were not not improved, improved, as as it it appeared appeared to to me, me, by by the the old old soldier: soldier: who who continually continually recalled recalled passages passages of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon's maldon's youth. youth. the the doctor, doctor, however, however, who who felt, felt, i i am am sure, sure, that that he he was was making making everybody everybody happy, happy, was was well well pleased, pleased, and and had had no no suspicion suspicion but but that that we we were were all all at at the the utmost utmost height height of of enjoyment. enjoyment. 'annie, 'annie, my my dear,' dear,' said said he, he, looking looking at at his his watch, watch, and and filling filling his his glass, glass, 'it 'it is is past past your your cousin cousin jack's jack's time, time, and and we we must must not not detain detain him, him, since since time time and and tide tide -- -- both both concerned concerned in in this this case case -- -- wait wait for for no no man. man. mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, you have have a a long long voyage, voyage, and and a a strange strange country, country, before before you; but but many many men men have have had had both, both, and and many many men men will will have have both, both, to to the the end end of of time. time. the the winds winds you are are going going to to tempt, tempt, have have wafted wafted thousands thousands upon upon thousands thousands to to fortune, fortune, and and brought brought thousands thousands upon upon thousands thousands happily happily back.' back.' 'it's 'it's an an affecting affecting thing,' thing,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham markleham -- -- 'however 'however it's it's viewed, viewed, it's it's affecting, affecting, to to see see a a fine fine young young man man one one has has known known from from an an infant, infant, going going away away to to the the other other end end of of the the world, world, leaving leaving all all he he knows knows behind, behind, and and not not knowing knowing what's what's before before him. him. a a young young man man really really well well deserves deserves constant constant support support and and patronage,' patronage,' looking looking at at the the doctor, doctor, 'who 'who makes makes such such sacrifices.' sacrifices.' 'time 'time will will go go fast fast with with you, mr. mr. jack jack maldon,' maldon,' pursued pursued the the doctor, doctor, 'and 'and fast fast with with all all of of us. us. some some of of us us can can hardly hardly expect, expect, perhaps, perhaps, in in the the natural natural course course of of things, things, to to greet greet you on on your your return. return. the the next next best best thing thing is is to to hope hope to to do do it, it, and and that's that's my my case. case. i i shall shall not not weary weary you with with good good advice. advice. you have have long long had had a a good good model model before before you, in in your your cousin cousin annie. annie. imitate imitate her her virtues virtues as as nearly nearly as as you can.' can.' mrs. mrs. markleham markleham fanned fanned herself, herself, and and shook shook her her head. head. 'farewell, 'farewell, mr. mr. jack,' jack,' said said the the doctor, doctor, standing standing up; up; on on which which we we all all stood stood up. up. 'a 'a prosperous prosperous voyage voyage out, out, a a thriving thriving career career abroad, abroad, and and a a happy happy return return home!' home!' we we all all drank drank the the toast, toast, and and all all shook shook hands hands with with mr. mr. jack jack maldon; maldon; after after which which he he hastily hastily took took leave leave of of the the ladies ladies who who were were there, there, and and hurried hurried to to the the door, door, where where he he was was received, received, as as he he got got into into the the chaise, chaise, with with a a tremendous tremendous broadside broadside of of cheers cheers discharged discharged by by our our boys, boys, who who had had assembled assembled on on the the lawn lawn for for the the purpose. purpose. running running in in among among them them to to swell swell the the ranks, ranks, i i was was very very near near the the chaise chaise when when it it rolled rolled away; away; and and i i had had a a lively lively impression impression made made upon upon me, me, in in the the midst midst of of the the noise noise and and dust, dust, of of having having seen seen mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon rattle rattle past past with with an an agitated agitated face, face, and and something something cherry-coloured cherry-coloured in in his his hand. hand. after after another another broadside broadside for for the the doctor, doctor, and and another another for for the the doctor's doctor's wife, wife, the the boys boys dispersed, dispersed, and and i i went went back back into into the the house, house, where where i i found found the the guests guests all all standing standing in in a a group group about about the the doctor, doctor, discussing discussing how how mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon had had gone gone away, away, and and how how he he had had borne borne it, it, and and how how he he had had felt felt it, it, and and all all the the rest rest of of it. it. in in the the midst midst of of these these remarks, remarks, mrs. mrs. markleham markleham cried: cried: 'where's 'where's annie?' annie?' no no annie annie was was there; there; and and when when they they called called to to her, her, no no annie annie replied. replied. but but all all pressing pressing out out of of the the room, room, in in a a crowd, crowd, to to see see what what was was the the matter, matter, we we found found her her lying lying on on the the hall hall floor. floor. there there was was great great alarm alarm at at first, first, until until it it was was found found that that she she was was in in a a swoon, swoon, and and that that the the swoon swoon was was yielding yielding to to the the usual usual means means of of recovery; recovery; when when the the doctor, doctor, who who had had lifted lifted her her head head upon upon his his knee, knee, put put her her curls curls aside aside with with his his hand, hand, and and said, said, looking looking around: around: 'poor 'poor annie! annie! she's she's so so faithful faithful and and tender-hearted! tender-hearted! it's it's the the parting parting from from her her old old playfellow playfellow and and friend friend -- -- her her favourite favourite cousin cousin -- -- that that has has done done this. this. ah! ah! it's it's a a pity! pity! i i am am very very sorry!' sorry!' when when she she opened opened her her eyes, eyes, and and saw saw where where she she was, was, and and that that we we were were all all standing standing about about her, her, she she arose arose with with assistance: assistance: turning turning her her head, head, as as she she did did so, so, to to lay lay it it on on the the doctor's doctor's shoulder shoulder -- -- or or to to hide hide it, it, i i don't don't know know which. which. we we went went into into the the drawing-room, drawing-room, to to leave leave her her with with the the doctor doctor and and her her mother; mother; but but she she said, said, it it seemed, seemed, that that she she was was better better than than she she had had been been since since morning, morning, and and that that she she would would rather rather be be brought brought among among us; us; so so they they brought brought her her in, in, looking looking very very white white and and weak, weak, i i thought, thought, and and sat sat her her on on a a sofa. sofa. 'annie, 'annie, my my dear,' dear,' said said her her mother, mother, doing doing something something to to her her dress. dress. 'see 'see here! here! you have have lost lost a a bow. bow. will will anybody anybody be be so so good good as as find find a a ribbon; ribbon; a a cherry-coloured cherry-coloured ribbon?' ribbon?' it it was was the the one one she she had had worn worn at at her her bosom. bosom. we we all all looked looked for for it; it; i i myself myself looked looked everywhere, everywhere, i i am am certain certain -- -- but but nobody nobody could could find find it. it. 'do 'do you recollect recollect where where you had had it it last, last, annie?' annie?' said said her her mother. mother. i i wondered wondered how how i i could could have have thought thought she she looked looked white, white, or or anything anything but but burning burning red, red, when when she she answered answered that that she she had had had had it it safe, safe, a a little little while while ago, ago, she she thought, thought, but but it it was was not not worth worth looking looking for. for. nevertheless, nevertheless, it it was was looked looked for for again, again, and and still still not not found. found. she she entreated entreated that that there there might might be be no no more more searching; searching; but but it it was was still still sought sought for, for, in in a a desultory desultory way, way, until until she she was was quite quite well, well, and and the the company company took took their their departure. departure. we we walked walked very very slowly slowly home, home, mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, agnes, agnes, and and i i -- -- agnes agnes and and i i admiring admiring the the moonlight, moonlight, and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield scarcely scarcely raising raising his his eyes eyes from from the the ground. ground. when when we, we, at at last, last, reached reached our our own own door, door, agnes agnes discovered discovered that that she she had had left left her her little little reticule reticule behind. behind. delighted delighted to to be be of of any any service service to to her, her, i i ran ran back back to to fetch fetch it. it. i i went went into into the the supper-room supper-room where where it it had had been been left, left, which which was was deserted deserted and and dark. dark. but but a a door door of of communication communication between between that that and and the the doctor's doctor's study, study, where where there there was was a a light, light, being being open, open, i i passed passed on on there, there, to to say say what what i i wanted, wanted, and and to to get get a a candle. candle. the the doctor doctor was was sitting sitting in in his his easy-chair easy-chair by by the the fireside, fireside, and and his his young young wife wife was was on on a a stool stool at at his his feet. feet. the the doctor, doctor, with with a a complacent complacent smile, smile, was was reading reading aloud aloud some some manuscript manuscript explanation explanation or or statement statement of of a a theory theory out out of of that that interminable interminable dictionary, dictionary, and and she she was was looking looking up up at at him. him. but but with with such such a a face face as as i i never never saw. saw. it it was was so so beautiful beautiful in in its its form, form, it it was was so so ashy ashy pale, pale, it it was was so so fixed fixed in in its its abstraction, abstraction, it it was was so so full full of of a a wild, wild, sleep-walking, sleep-walking, dreamy dreamy horror horror of of i i don't don't know know what. what. the the eyes eyes were were wide wide open, open, and and her her brown brown hair hair fell fell in in two two rich rich clusters clusters on on her her shoulders, shoulders, and and on on her her white white dress, dress, disordered disordered by by the the want want of of the the lost lost ribbon. ribbon. distinctly distinctly as as i i recollect recollect her her look, look, i i cannot cannot say say of of what what it it was was expressive, expressive, i i cannot cannot even even say say of of what what it it is is expressive expressive to to me me now, now, rising rising again again before before my my older older judgement. judgement. penitence, penitence, humiliation, humiliation, shame, shame, pride, pride, love, love, and and trustfulness trustfulness -- -- i i see see them them all; all; and and in in them them all, all, i i see see that that horror horror of of i i don't don't know know what. what. my my entrance, entrance, and and my my saying saying what what i i wanted, wanted, roused roused her. her. it it disturbed disturbed the the doctor doctor too, too, for for when when i i went went back back to to replace replace the the candle candle i i had had taken taken from from the the table, table, he he was was patting patting her her head, head, in in his his fatherly fatherly way, way, and and saying saying he he was was a a merciless merciless drone drone to to let let her her tempt tempt him him into into reading reading on; on; and and he he would would have have her her go go to to bed. bed. but but she she asked asked him, him, in in a a rapid, rapid, urgent urgent manner, manner, to to let let her her stay stay -- -- to to let let her her feel feel assured assured (i (i heard heard her her murmur murmur some some broken broken words words to to this this effect) effect) that that she she was was in in his his confidence confidence that that night. night. and, and, as as she she turned turned again again towards towards him, him, after after glancing glancing at at me me as as i i left left the the room room and and went went out out at at the the door, door, i i saw saw her her cross cross her her hands hands upon upon his his knee, knee, and and look look up up at at him him with with the the same same face, face, something something quieted, quieted, as as he he resumed resumed his his reading. reading. it it made made a a great great impression impression on on me, me, and and i i remembered remembered it it a a long long time time afterwards; afterwards; as as i i shall shall have have occasion occasion to to narrate narrate when when the the time time comes. comes. chapter chapter 17. 17. somebody somebody turns turns up up it it has has not not occurred occurred to to me me to to mention mention peggotty peggotty since since i i ran ran away; away; but, but, of of course, course, i i wrote wrote her her a a letter letter almost almost as as soon soon as as i i was was housed housed at at dover, dover, and and another, another, and and a a longer longer letter, letter, containing containing all all particulars particulars fully fully related, related, when when my my aunt aunt took took me me formally formally under under her her protection. protection. on on my my being being settled settled at at doctor doctor strong's strong's i i wrote wrote to to her her again, again, detailing detailing my my happy happy condition condition and and prospects. prospects. i i never never could could have have derived derived anything anything like like the the pleasure pleasure from from spending spending the the money money mr. mr. dick dick had had given given me, me, that that i i felt felt in in sending sending a a gold gold half-guinea half-guinea to to peggotty, peggotty, per per post, post, enclosed enclosed in in this this last last letter, letter, to to discharge discharge the the sum sum i i had had borrowed borrowed of of her: her: in in which which epistle, epistle, not not before, before, i i mentioned mentioned about about the the young young man man with with the the donkey-cart. donkey-cart. to to these these communications communications peggotty peggotty replied replied as as promptly, promptly, if if not not as as concisely, concisely, as as a a merchant's merchant's clerk. clerk. her her utmost utmost powers powers of of expression expression (which (which were were certainly certainly not not great great in in ink) ink) were were exhausted exhausted in in the the attempt attempt to to write write what what she she felt felt on on the the subject subject of of my my journey. journey. four four sides sides of of incoherent incoherent and and interjectional interjectional beginnings beginnings of of sentences, sentences, that that had had no no end, end, except except blots, blots, were were inadequate inadequate to to afford afford her her any any relief. relief. but but the the blots blots were were more more expressive expressive to to me me than than the the best best composition; composition; for for they they showed showed me me that that peggotty peggotty had had been been crying crying all all over over the the paper, paper, and and what what could could i i have have desired desired more? more? i i made made out, out, without without much much difficulty, difficulty, that that she she could could not not take take quite quite kindly kindly to to my my aunt aunt yet. yet. the the notice notice was was too too short short after after so so long long a a prepossession prepossession the the other other way. way. we we never never knew knew a a person, person, she she wrote; wrote; but but to to think think that that miss miss betsey betsey should should seem seem to to be be so so different different from from what what she she had had been been thought thought to to be, be, was was a a moral! moral! -- -- that that was was her her word. word. she she was was evidently evidently still still afraid afraid of of miss miss betsey, betsey, for for she she sent sent her her grateful grateful duty duty to to her her but but timidly; timidly; and and she she was was evidently evidently afraid afraid of of me, me, too, too, and and entertained entertained the the probability probability of of my my running running away away again again soon: soon: if if i i might might judge judge from from the the repeated repeated hints hints she she threw threw out, out, that that the the coach-fare coach-fare to to yarmouth yarmouth was was always always to to be be had had of of her her for for the the asking. asking. she she gave gave me me one one piece piece of of intelligence intelligence which which affected affected me me very very much, much, namely, namely, that that there there had had been been a a sale sale of of the the furniture furniture at at our our old old home, home, and and that that mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone were were gone gone away, away, and and the the house house was was shut shut up, up, to to be be let let or or sold. sold. god god knows knows i i had had no no part part in in it it while while they they remained remained there, there, but but it it pained pained me me to to think think of of the the dear dear old old place place as as altogether altogether abandoned; abandoned; of of the the weeds weeds growing growing tall tall in in the the garden, garden, and and the the fallen fallen leaves leaves lying lying thick thick and and wet wet upon upon the the paths. paths. i i imagined imagined how how the the winds winds of of winter winter would would howl howl round round it, it, how how the the cold cold rain rain would would beat beat upon upon the the window-glass, window-glass, how how the the moon moon would would make make ghosts ghosts on on the the walls walls of of the the empty empty rooms, rooms, watching watching their their solitude solitude all all night. night. i i thought thought afresh afresh of of the the grave grave in in the the churchyard, churchyard, underneath underneath the the tree: tree: and and it it seemed seemed as as if if the the house house were were dead dead too, too, now, now, and and all all connected connected with with my my father father and and mother mother were were faded faded away. away. there there was was no no other other news news in in peggotty's peggotty's letters. letters. mr. mr. barkis barkis was was an an excellent excellent husband, husband, she she said, said, though though still still a a little little near; near; but but we we all all had had our our faults, faults, and and she she had had plenty plenty (though (though i i am am sure sure i i don't don't know know what what they they were); were); and and he he sent sent his his duty, duty, and and my my little little bedroom bedroom was was always always ready ready for for me. me. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was well, well, and and ham ham was was well, well, and and mrs.. mrs.. gummidge gummidge was was but but poorly, poorly, and and little little em'ly em'ly wouldn't wouldn't send send her her love, love, but but said said that that peggotty peggotty might might send send it, it, if if she she liked. liked. all all this this intelligence intelligence i i dutifully dutifully imparted imparted to to my my aunt, aunt, only only reserving reserving to to myself myself the the mention mention of of little little em'ly, em'ly, to to whom whom i i instinctively instinctively felt felt that that she she would would not not very very tenderly tenderly incline. incline. while while i i was was yet yet new new at at doctor doctor strong's, strong's, she she made made several several excursions excursions over over to to canterbury canterbury to to see see me, me, and and always always at at unseasonable unseasonable hours: hours: with with the the view, view, i i suppose, suppose, of of taking taking me me by by surprise. surprise. but, but, finding finding me me well well employed, employed, and and bearing bearing a a good good character, character, and and hearing hearing on on all all hands hands that that i i rose rose fast fast in in the the school, school, she she soon soon discontinued discontinued these these visits. visits. i i saw saw her her on on a a saturday, saturday, every every third third or or fourth fourth week, week, when when i i went went over over to to dover dover for for a a treat; treat; and and i i saw saw mr. mr. dick dick every every alternate alternate wednesday, wednesday, when when he he arrived arrived by by stage-coach stage-coach at at noon, noon, to to stay stay until until next next morning. morning. on on these these occasions occasions mr. mr. dick dick never never travelled travelled without without a a leathern leathern writing-desk, writing-desk, containing containing a a supply supply of of stationery stationery and and the the memorial; memorial; in in relation relation to to which which document document he he had had a a notion notion that that time time was was beginning beginning to to press press now, now, and and that that it it really really must must be be got got out out of of hand. hand. mr. mr. dick dick was was very very partial partial to to gingerbread. gingerbread. to to render render his his visits visits the the more more agreeable, agreeable, my my aunt aunt had had instructed instructed me me to to open open a a credit credit for for him him at at a a cake cake shop, shop, which which was was hampered hampered with with the the stipulation stipulation that that he he should should not not be be served served with with more more than than one one shilling's-worth shilling's-worth in in the the course course of of any any one one day. day. this, this, and and the the reference reference of of all all his his little little bills bills at at the the county county inn inn where where he he slept, slept, to to my my aunt, aunt, before before they they were were paid, paid, induced induced me me to to suspect suspect that that he he was was only only allowed allowed to to rattle rattle his his money, money, and and not not to to spend spend it. it. i i found found on on further further investigation investigation that that this this was was so, so, or or at at least least there there was was an an agreement agreement between between him him and and my my aunt aunt that that he he should should account account to to her her for for all all his his disbursements. disbursements. as as he he had had no no idea idea of of deceiving deceiving her, her, and and always always desired desired to to please please her, her, he he was was thus thus made made chary chary of of launching launching into into expense. expense. on on this this point, point, as as well well as as on on all all other other possible possible points, points, mr. mr. dick dick was was convinced convinced that that my my aunt aunt was was the the wisest wisest and and most most wonderful wonderful of of women; women; as as he he repeatedly repeatedly told told me me with with infinite infinite secrecy, secrecy, and and always always in in a a whisper. whisper. 'trotwood,' 'trotwood,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with an an air air of of mystery, mystery, after after imparting imparting this this confidence confidence to to me, me, one one wednesday; wednesday; 'who's 'who's the the man man that that hides hides near near our our house house and and frightens frightens her?' her?' 'frightens 'frightens my my aunt, aunt, sir?' sir?' mr. mr. dick dick nodded. nodded. 'i 'i thought thought nothing nothing would would have have frightened frightened her,' her,' he he said, said, 'for 'for she's she's -- -- ' ' here here he he whispered whispered softly, softly, 'don't 'don't mention mention it it -- -- the the wisest wisest and and most most wonderful wonderful of of women.' women.' having having said said which, which, he he drew drew back, back, to to observe observe the the effect effect which which this this description description of of her her made made upon upon me. me. 'the 'the first first time time he he came,' came,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'was 'was -- -- let let me me see see -- -- sixteen sixteen hundred hundred and and forty-nine forty-nine was was the the date date of of king king charles's charles's execution. execution. i i think think you said said sixteen sixteen hundred hundred and and forty-nine?' forty-nine?' 'yes, 'yes, sir.' sir.' 'i 'i don't don't know know how how it it can can be,' be,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, sorely sorely puzzled puzzled and and shaking shaking his his head. head. 'i 'i don't don't think think i i am am as as old old as as that.' that.' 'was 'was it it in in that that year year that that the the man man appeared, appeared, sir?' sir?' i i asked. asked. 'why, 'why, really' really' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'i 'i don't don't see see how how it it can can have have been been in in that that year, year, trotwood. trotwood. did did you get get that that date date out out of of history?' history?' 'yes, 'yes, sir.' sir.' 'i 'i suppose suppose history history never never lies, lies, does does it?' it?' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with a a gleam gleam of of hope. hope. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no, no, sir!' sir!' i i replied, replied, most most decisively. decisively. i i was was ingenuous ingenuous and and young, young, and and i i thought thought so. so. 'i 'i can't can't make make it it out,' out,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, shaking shaking his his head. head. 'there's 'there's something something wrong, wrong, somewhere. somewhere. however, however, it it was was very very soon soon after after the the mistake mistake was was made made of of putting putting some some of of the the trouble trouble out out of of king king charles's charles's head head into into my my head, head, that that the the man man first first came. came. i i was was walking walking out out with with miss miss trotwood trotwood after after tea, tea, just just at at dark, dark, and and there there he he was, was, close close to to our our house.' house.' 'walking 'walking about?' about?' i i inquired. inquired. 'walking 'walking about?' about?' repeated repeated mr. mr. dick. dick. 'let 'let me me see, see, i i must must recollect recollect a a bit. bit. n-no, n-no, no; no; he he was was not not walking walking about.' about.' i i asked, asked, as as the the shortest shortest way way to to get get at at it, it, what what he he was was doing. doing. 'well, 'well, he he wasn't wasn't there there at at all,' all,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'until 'until he he came came up up behind behind her, her, and and whispered. whispered. then then she she turned turned round round and and fainted, fainted, and and i i stood stood still still and and looked looked at at him, him, and and he he walked walked away; away; but but that that he he should should have have been been hiding hiding ever ever since since (in (in the the ground ground or or somewhere), somewhere), is is the the most most extraordinary extraordinary thing!' thing!' 'has 'has he he been been hiding hiding ever ever since?' since?' i i asked. asked. 'to 'to be be sure sure he he has,' has,' retorted retorted mr. mr. dick, dick, nodding nodding his his head head gravely. gravely. 'never 'never came came out, out, till till last last night! night! we we were were walking walking last last night, night, and and he he came came up up behind behind her her again, again, and and i i knew knew him him again.' again.' 'and 'and did did he he frighten frighten my my aunt aunt again?' again?' 'all 'all of of a a shiver,' shiver,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, counterfeiting counterfeiting that that affection affection and and making making his his teeth teeth chatter. chatter. 'held 'held by by the the palings. palings. cried. cried. but, but, trotwood, trotwood, come come here,' here,' getting getting me me close close to to him, him, that that he he might might whisper whisper very very softly; softly; 'why 'why did did she she give give him him money, money, boy, boy, in in the the moonlight?' moonlight?' 'he 'he was was a a beggar, beggar, perhaps.' perhaps.' mr. mr. dick dick shook shook his his head, head, as as utterly utterly renouncing renouncing the the suggestion; suggestion; and and having having replied replied a a great great many many times, times, and and with with great great confidence, confidence, 'no 'no beggar, beggar, no no beggar, beggar, no no beggar, beggar, sir!' sir!' went went on on to to say, say, that that from from his his window window he he had had afterwards, afterwards, and and late late at at night, night, seen seen my my aunt aunt give give this this person person money money outside outside the the garden garden rails rails in in the the moonlight, moonlight, who who then then slunk slunk away away -- -- into into the the ground ground again, again, as as he he thought thought probable probable -- -- and and was was seen seen no no more: more: while while my my aunt aunt came came hurriedly hurriedly and and secretly secretly back back into into the the house, house, and and had, had, even even that that morning, morning, been been quite quite different different from from her her usual usual self; self; which which preyed preyed on on mr. mr. dick's dick's mind. mind. i i had had not not the the least least belief, belief, in in the the outset outset of of this this story, story, that that the the unknown unknown was was anything anything but but a a delusion delusion of of mr. mr. dick's, dick's, and and one one of of the the line line of of that that ill-fated ill-fated prince prince who who occasioned occasioned him him so so much much difficulty; difficulty; but but after after some some reflection reflection i i began began to to entertain entertain the the question question whether whether an an attempt, attempt, or or threat threat of of an an attempt, attempt, might might have have been been twice twice made made to to take take poor poor mr. mr. dick dick himself himself from from under under my my aunt's aunt's protection, protection, and and whether whether my my aunt, aunt, the the strength strength of of whose whose kind kind feeling feeling towards towards him him i i knew knew from from herself, herself, might might have have been been induced induced to to pay pay a a price price for for his his peace peace and and quiet. quiet. as as i i was was already already much much attached attached to to mr. mr. dick, dick, and and very very solicitous solicitous for for his his welfare, welfare, my my fears fears favoured favoured this this supposition; supposition; and and for for a a long long time time his his wednesday wednesday hardly hardly ever ever came came round, round, without without my my entertaining entertaining a a misgiving misgiving that that he he would would not not be be on on the the coach-box coach-box as as usual. usual. there there he he always always appeared, appeared, however, however, grey-headed, grey-headed, laughing, laughing, and and happy; happy; and and he he never never had had anything anything more more to to tell tell of of the the man man who who could could frighten frighten my my aunt. aunt. these these wednesdays wednesdays were were the the happiest happiest days days of of mr. mr. dick's dick's life; life; they they were were far far from from being being the the least least happy happy of of mine. mine. he he soon soon became became known known to to every every boy boy in in the the school; school; and and though though he he never never took took an an active active part part in in any any game game but but kite-flying, kite-flying, was was as as deeply deeply interested interested in in all all our our sports sports as as anyone anyone among among us. us. how how often often have have i i seen seen him, him, intent intent upon upon a a match match at at marbles marbles or or pegtop, pegtop, looking looking on on with with a a face face of of unutterable unutterable interest, interest, and and hardly hardly breathing breathing at at the the critical critical times! times! how how often, often, at at hare hare and and hounds, hounds, have have i i seen seen him him mounted mounted on on a a little little knoll, knoll, cheering cheering the the whole whole field field on on to to action, action, and and waving waving his his hat hat above above his his grey grey head, head, oblivious oblivious of of king king charles charles the the martyr's martyr's head, head, and and all all belonging belonging to to it! it! how how many many a a summer summer hour hour have have i i known known to to be be but but blissful blissful minutes minutes to to him him in in the the cricket-field! cricket-field! how how many many winter winter days days have have i i seen seen him, him, standing standing blue-nosed, blue-nosed, in in the the snow snow and and east east wind, wind, looking looking at at the the boys boys going going down down the the long long slide, slide, and and clapping clapping his his worsted worsted gloves gloves in in rapture! rapture! he he was was an an universal universal favourite, favourite, and and his his ingenuity ingenuity in in little little things things was was transcendent. transcendent. he he could could cut cut oranges oranges into into such such devices devices as as none none of of us us had had an an idea idea of. of. he he could could make make a a boat boat out out of of anything, anything, from from a a skewer skewer upwards. upwards. he he could could turn turn cramp-bones cramp-bones into into chessmen; chessmen; fashion fashion roman roman chariots chariots from from old old court court cards; cards; make make spoked spoked wheels wheels out out of of cotton cotton reels, reels, and and bird-cages bird-cages of of old old wire. wire. but but he he was was greatest greatest of of all, all, perhaps, perhaps, in in the the articles articles of of string string and and straw; straw; with with which which we we were were all all persuaded persuaded he he could could do do anything anything that that could could be be done done by by hands. hands. mr. mr. dick's dick's renown renown was was not not long long confined confined to to us. us. after after a a few few wednesdays, wednesdays, doctor doctor strong strong himself himself made made some some inquiries inquiries of of me me about about him, him, and and i i told told him him all all my my aunt aunt had had told told me; me; which which interested interested the the doctor doctor so so much much that that he he requested, requested, on on the the occasion occasion of of his his next next visit, visit, to to be be presented presented to to him. him. this this ceremony ceremony i i performed; performed; and and the the doctor doctor begging begging mr. mr. dick, dick, whensoever whensoever he he should should not not find find me me at at the the coach coach office, office, to to come come on on there, there, and and rest rest himself himself until until our our morning's morning's work work was was over, over, it it soon soon passed passed into into a a custom custom for for mr. mr. dick dick to to come come on on as as a a matter matter of of course, course, and, and, if if we we were were a a little little late, late, as as often often happened happened on on a a wednesday, wednesday, to to walk walk about about the the courtyard, courtyard, waiting waiting for for me. me. here here he he made made the the acquaintance acquaintance of of the the doctor's doctor's beautiful beautiful young young wife wife (paler (paler than than formerly, formerly, all all this this time; time; more more rarely rarely seen seen by by me me or or anyone, anyone, i i think; think; and and not not so so gay, gay, but but not not less less beautiful), beautiful), and and so so became became more more and and more more familiar familiar by by degrees, degrees, until, until, at at last, last, he he would would come come into into the the school school and and wait. wait. he he always always sat sat in in a a particular particular corner, corner, on on a a particular particular stool, stool, which which was was called called 'dick', 'dick', after after him; him; here here he he would would sit, sit, with with his his grey grey head head bent bent forward, forward, attentively attentively listening listening to to whatever whatever might might be be going going on, on, with with a a profound profound veneration veneration for for the the learning learning he he had had never never been been able able to to acquire. acquire. this this veneration veneration mr. mr. dick dick extended extended to to the the doctor, doctor, whom whom he he thought thought the the most most subtle subtle and and accomplished accomplished philosopher philosopher of of any any age. age. it it was was long long before before mr. mr. dick dick ever ever spoke spoke to to him him otherwise otherwise than than bareheaded; bareheaded; and and even even when when he he and and the the doctor doctor had had struck struck up up quite quite a a friendship, friendship, and and would would walk walk together together by by the the hour, hour, on on that that side side of of the the courtyard courtyard which which was was known known among among us us as as the the doctor's doctor's walk, walk, mr. mr. dick dick would would pull pull off off his his hat hat at at intervals intervals to to show show his his respect respect for for wisdom wisdom and and knowledge. knowledge. how how it it ever ever came came about about that that the the doctor doctor began began to to read read out out scraps scraps of of the the famous famous dictionary, dictionary, in in these these walks, walks, i i never never knew; knew; perhaps perhaps he he felt felt it it all all the the same, same, at at first, first, as as reading reading to to himself. himself. however, however, it it passed passed into into a a custom custom too; too; and and mr. mr. dick, dick, listening listening with with a a face face shining shining with with pride pride and and pleasure, pleasure, in in his his heart heart of of hearts hearts believed believed the the dictionary dictionary to to be be the the most most delightful delightful book book in in the the world. world. as as i i think think of of them them going going up up and and down down before before those those schoolroom schoolroom windows windows -- -- the the doctor doctor reading reading with with his his complacent complacent smile, smile, an an occasional occasional flourish flourish of of the the manuscript, manuscript, or or grave grave motion motion of of his his head; head; and and mr. mr. dick dick listening, listening, enchained enchained by by interest, interest, with with his his poor poor wits wits calmly calmly wandering wandering god god knows knows where, where, upon upon the the wings wings of of hard hard words words -- -- i i think think of of it it as as one one of of the the pleasantest pleasantest things, things, in in a a quiet quiet way, way, that that i i have have ever ever seen. seen. i i feel feel as as if if they they might might go go walking walking to to and and fro fro for for ever, ever, and and the the world world might might somehow somehow be be the the better better for for it it -- -- as as if if a a thousand thousand things things it it makes makes a a noise noise about, about, were were not not one one half half so so good good for for it, it, or or me. me. agnes agnes was was one one of of mr. mr. dick's dick's friends, friends, very very soon; soon; and and in in often often coming coming to to the the house, house, he he made made acquaintance acquaintance with with uriah. uriah. the the friendship friendship between between himself himself and and me me increased increased continually, continually, and and it it was was maintained maintained on on this this odd odd footing: footing: that, that, while while mr. mr. dick dick came came professedly professedly to to look look after after me me as as my my guardian, guardian, he he always always consulted consulted me me in in any any little little matter matter of of doubt doubt that that arose, arose, and and invariably invariably guided guided himself himself by by my my advice; advice; not not only only having having a a high high respect respect for for my my native native sagacity, sagacity, but but considering considering that that i i inherited inherited a a good good deal deal from from my my aunt. aunt. one one thursday thursday morning, morning, when when i i was was about about to to walk walk with with mr. mr. dick dick from from the the hotel hotel to to the the coach coach office office before before going going back back to to school school (for (for we we had had an an hour's hour's school school before before breakfast), breakfast), i i met met uriah uriah in in the the street, street, who who reminded reminded me me of of the the promise promise i i had had made made to to take take tea tea with with himself himself and and his his mother: mother: adding, adding, with with a a writhe, writhe, 'but 'but i i didn't didn't expect expect you to to keep keep it, it, master master copperfield, copperfield, we're we're so so very very umble.' umble.' i i really really had had not not yet yet been been able able to to make make up up my my mind mind whether whether i i liked liked uriah uriah or or detested detested him; him; and and i i was was very very doubtful doubtful about about it it still, still, as as i i stood stood looking looking him him in in the the face face in in the the street. street. but but i i felt felt it it quite quite an an affront affront to to be be supposed supposed proud, proud, and and said said i i only only wanted wanted to to be be asked. asked. 'oh, 'oh, if if that's that's all, all, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, 'and 'and it it really really isn't isn't our our umbleness umbleness that that prevents prevents you, will will you come come this this evening? evening? but but if if it it is is our our umbleness, umbleness, i i hope hope you won't won't mind mind owning owning to to it, it, master master copperfield; copperfield; for for we we are are well well aware aware of of our our condition.' condition.' i i said said i i would would mention mention it it to to mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, and and if if he he approved, approved, as as i i had had no no doubt doubt he he would, would, i i would would come come with with pleasure. pleasure. so, so, at at six six o'clock o'clock that that evening, evening, which which was was one one of of the the early early office office evenings, evenings, i i announced announced myself myself as as ready, ready, to to uriah. uriah. 'mother 'mother will will be be proud, proud, indeed,' indeed,' he he said, said, as as we we walked walked away away together. together. 'or 'or she she would would be be proud, proud, if if it it wasn't wasn't sinful, sinful, master master copperfield.' copperfield.' 'yet 'yet you didn't didn't mind mind supposing supposing i i was was proud proud this this morning,' morning,' i i returned. returned. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no, no, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' returned returned uriah. uriah. 'oh, 'oh, believe believe me, me, no! no! such such a a thought thought never never came came into into my my head! head! i i shouldn't shouldn't have have deemed deemed it it at at all all proud proud if if you had had thought thought us us too too umble umble for for you. because because we we are are so so very very umble.' umble.' 'have 'have you been been studying studying much much law law lately?' lately?' i i asked, asked, to to change change the the subject. subject. 'oh, 'oh, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he said, said, with with an an air air of of self-denial, self-denial, 'my 'my reading reading is is hardly hardly to to be be called called study. study. i i have have passed passed an an hour hour or or two two in in the the evening, evening, sometimes, sometimes, with with mr. mr. tidd.' tidd.' 'rather 'rather hard, hard, i i suppose?' suppose?' said said i. i. 'he 'he is is hard hard to to me me sometimes,' sometimes,' returned returned uriah. uriah. 'but 'but i i don't don't know know what what he he might might be be to to a a gifted gifted person.' person.' after after beating beating a a little little tune tune on on his his chin chin as as he he walked walked on, on, with with the the two two forefingers forefingers of of his his skeleton skeleton right right hand, hand, he he added: added: 'there 'there are are expressions, expressions, you see, see, master master copperfield copperfield -- -- latin latin words words and and terms terms -- -- in in mr. mr. tidd, tidd, that that are are trying trying to to a a reader reader of of my my umble umble attainments.' attainments.' 'would 'would you like like to to be be taught taught latin?' latin?' i i said said briskly. briskly. 'i 'i will will teach teach it it you with with pleasure, pleasure, as as i i learn learn it.' it.' 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he answered, answered, shaking shaking his his head. head. 'i 'i am am sure sure it's it's very very kind kind of of you to to make make the the offer, offer, but but i i am am much much too too umble umble to to accept accept it.' it.' 'what 'what nonsense, nonsense, uriah!' uriah!' 'oh, 'oh, indeed indeed you must must excuse excuse me, me, master master copperfield! copperfield! i i am am greatly greatly obliged, obliged, and and i i should should like like it it of of all all things, things, i i assure assure you; but but i i am am far far too too umble. umble. there there are are people people enough enough to to tread tread upon upon me me in in my my lowly lowly state, state, without without my my doing doing outrage outrage to to their their feelings feelings by by possessing possessing learning. learning. learning learning ain't ain't for for me. me. a a person person like like myself myself had had better better not not aspire. aspire. if if he he is is to to get get on on in in life, life, he he must must get get on on umbly, umbly, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' i i never never saw saw his his mouth mouth so so wide, wide, or or the the creases creases in in his his cheeks cheeks so so deep, deep, as as when when he he delivered delivered himself himself of of these these sentiments: sentiments: shaking shaking his his head head all all the the time, time, and and writhing writhing modestly. modestly. 'i 'i think think you are are wrong, wrong, uriah,' uriah,' i i said. said. 'i 'i dare dare say say there there are are several several things things that that i i could could teach teach you, if if you would would like like to to learn learn them.' them.' 'oh, 'oh, i i don't don't doubt doubt that, that, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he answered; answered; 'not 'not in in the the least. least. but but not not being being umble umble yourself, yourself, you don't don't judge judge well, well, perhaps, perhaps, for for them them that that are. are. i i won't won't provoke provoke my my betters betters with with knowledge, knowledge, thank thank you. i'm i'm much much too too umble. umble. here here is is my my umble umble dwelling, dwelling, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' we we entered entered a a low, low, old-fashioned old-fashioned room, room, walked walked straight straight into into from from the the street, street, and and found found there there mrs. mrs. heep, heep, who who was was the the dead dead image image of of uriah, uriah, only only short. short. she she received received me me with with the the utmost utmost humility, humility, and and apologized apologized to to me me for for giving giving her her son son a a kiss, kiss, observing observing that, that, lowly lowly as as they they were, were, they they had had their their natural natural affections, affections, which which they they hoped hoped would would give give no no offence offence to to anyone. anyone. it it was was a a perfectly perfectly decent decent room, room, half half parlour parlour and and half half kitchen, kitchen, but but not not at at all all a a snug snug room. room. the the tea-things tea-things were were set set upon upon the the table, table, and and the the kettle kettle was was boiling boiling on on the the hob. hob. there there was was a a chest chest of of drawers drawers with with an an escritoire escritoire top, top, for for uriah uriah to to read read or or write write at at of of an an evening; evening; there there was was uriah's uriah's blue blue bag bag lying lying down down and and vomiting vomiting papers; papers; there there was was a a company company of of uriah's uriah's books books commanded commanded by by mr. mr. tidd; tidd; there there was was a a corner corner cupboard: cupboard: and and there there were were the the usual usual articles articles of of furniture. furniture. i i don't don't remember remember that that any any individual individual object object had had a a bare, bare, pinched, pinched, spare spare look; look; but but i i do do remember remember that that the the whole whole place place had. had. it it was was perhaps perhaps a a part part of of mrs. mrs. heep's heep's humility, humility, that that she she still still wore wore weeds. weeds. notwithstanding notwithstanding the the lapse lapse of of time time that that had had occurred occurred since since mr. mr. heep's heep's decease, decease, she she still still wore wore weeds. weeds. i i think think there there was was some some compromise compromise in in the the cap; cap; but but otherwise otherwise she she was was as as weedy weedy as as in in the the early early days days of of her her mourning. mourning. 'this 'this is is a a day day to to be be remembered, remembered, my my uriah, uriah, i i am am sure,' sure,' said said mrs. mrs. heep, heep, making making the the tea, tea, 'when 'when master master copperfield copperfield pays pays us us a a visit.' visit.' 'i 'i said said you'd you'd think think so, so, mother,' mother,' said said uriah. uriah. 'if 'if i i could could have have wished wished father father to to remain remain among among us us for for any any reason,' reason,' said said mrs. mrs. heep, heep, 'it 'it would would have have been, been, that that he he might might have have known known his his company company this this afternoon.' afternoon.' i i felt felt embarrassed embarrassed by by these these compliments; compliments; but but i i was was sensible, sensible, too, too, of of being being entertained entertained as as an an honoured honoured guest, guest, and and i i thought thought mrs. mrs. heep heep an an agreeable agreeable woman. woman. 'my 'my uriah,' uriah,' said said mrs. mrs. heep, heep, 'has 'has looked looked forward forward to to this, this, sir, sir, a a long long while. while. he he had had his his fears fears that that our our umbleness umbleness stood stood in in the the way, way, and and i i joined joined in in them them myself. myself. umble umble we we are, are, umble umble we we have have been, been, umble umble we we shall shall ever ever be,' be,' said said mrs. mrs. heep. heep. 'i 'i am am sure sure you have have no no occasion occasion to to be be so, so, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i said, said, 'unless 'unless you like.' like.' 'thank 'thank you, sir,' sir,' retorted retorted mrs. mrs. heep. heep. 'we 'we know know our our station station and and are are thankful thankful in in it.' it.' i i found found that that mrs. mrs. heep heep gradually gradually got got nearer nearer to to me, me, and and that that uriah uriah gradually gradually got got opposite opposite to to me, me, and and that that they they respectfully respectfully plied plied me me with with the the choicest choicest of of the the eatables eatables on on the the table. table. there there was was nothing nothing particularly particularly choice choice there, there, to to be be sure; sure; but but i i took took the the will will for for the the deed, deed, and and felt felt that that they they were were very very attentive. attentive. presently presently they they began began to to talk talk about about aunts, aunts, and and then then i i told told them them about about mine; mine; and and about about fathers fathers and and mothers, mothers, and and then then i i told told them them about about mine; mine; and and then then mrs. mrs. heep heep began began to to talk talk about about fathers-in-law, fathers-in-law, and and then then i i began began to to tell tell her her about about mine mine -- -- but but stopped, stopped, because because my my aunt aunt had had advised advised me me to to observe observe a a silence silence on on that that subject. subject. a a tender tender young young cork, cork, however, however, would would have have had had no no more more chance chance against against a a pair pair of of corkscrews, corkscrews, or or a a tender tender young young tooth tooth against against a a pair pair of of dentists, dentists, or or a a little little shuttlecock shuttlecock against against two two battledores, battledores, than than i i had had against against uriah uriah and and mrs. mrs. heep. heep. they they did did just just what what they they liked liked with with me; me; and and wormed wormed things things out out of of me me that that i i had had no no desire desire to to tell, tell, with with a a certainty certainty i i blush blush to to think think of, of, the the more more especially, especially, as as in in my my juvenile juvenile frankness, frankness, i i took took some some credit credit to to myself myself for for being being so so confidential confidential and and felt felt that that i i was was quite quite the the patron patron of of my my two two respectful respectful entertainers. entertainers. they they were were very very fond fond of of one one another: another: that that was was certain. certain. i i take take it, it, that that had had its its effect effect upon upon me, me, as as a a touch touch of of nature; nature; but but the the skill skill with with which which the the one one followed followed up up whatever whatever the the other other said, said, was was a a touch touch of of art art which which i i was was still still less less proof proof against. against. when when there there was was nothing nothing more more to to be be got got out out of of me me about about myself myself (for (for on on the the murdstone murdstone and and grinby grinby life, life, and and on on my my journey, journey, i i was was dumb), dumb), they they began began about about mr. mr. wickfield wickfield and and agnes. agnes. uriah uriah threw threw the the ball ball to to mrs. mrs. heep, heep, mrs. mrs. heep heep caught caught it it and and threw threw it it back back to to uriah, uriah, uriah uriah kept kept it it up up a a little little while, while, then then sent sent it it back back to to mrs. mrs. heep, heep, and and so so they they went went on on tossing tossing it it about about until until i i had had no no idea idea who who had had got got it, it, and and was was quite quite bewildered. bewildered. the the ball ball itself itself was was always always changing changing too. too. now now it it was was mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, now now agnes, agnes, now now the the excellence excellence of of mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, now now my my admiration admiration of of agnes; agnes; now now the the extent extent of of mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's business business and and resources, resources, now now our our domestic domestic life life after after dinner; dinner; now, now, the the wine wine that that mr. mr. wickfield wickfield took, took, the the reason reason why why he he took took it, it, and and the the pity pity that that it it was was he he took took so so much; much; now now one one thing, thing, now now another, another, then then everything everything at at once; once; and and all all the the time, time, without without appearing appearing to to speak speak very very often, often, or or to to do do anything anything but but sometimes sometimes encourage encourage them them a a little, little, for for fear fear they they should should be be overcome overcome by by their their humility humility and and the the honour honour of of my my company, company, i i found found myself myself perpetually perpetually letting letting out out something something or or other other that that i i had had no no business business to to let let out out and and seeing seeing the the effect effect of of it it in in the the twinkling twinkling of of uriah's uriah's dinted dinted nostrils. nostrils. i i had had begun begun to to be be a a little little uncomfortable, uncomfortable, and and to to wish wish myself myself well well out out of of the the visit, visit, when when a a figure figure coming coming down down the the street street passed passed the the door door -- -- it it stood stood open open to to air air the the room, room, which which was was warm, warm, the the weather weather being being close close for for the the time time of of year year -- -- came came back back again, again, looked looked in, in, and and walked walked in, in, exclaiming exclaiming loudly, loudly, 'copperfield! 'copperfield! is is it it possible?' possible?' it it was was mr. mr. micawber! micawber! it it was was mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with his his eye-glass, eye-glass, and and his his walking-stick, walking-stick, and and his his shirt-collar, shirt-collar, and and his his genteel genteel air, air, and and the the condescending condescending roll roll in in his his voice, voice, all all complete! complete! 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, putting putting out out his his hand, hand, 'this 'this is is indeed indeed a a meeting meeting which which is is calculated calculated to to impress impress the the mind mind with with a a sense sense of of the the instability instability and and uncertainty uncertainty of of all all human human -- -- in in short, short, it it is is a a most most extraordinary extraordinary meeting. meeting. walking walking along along the the street, street, reflecting reflecting upon upon the the probability probability of of something something turning turning up up (of (of which which i i am am at at present present rather rather sanguine), sanguine), i i find find a a young young but but valued valued friend friend turn turn up, up, who who is is connected connected with with the the most most eventful eventful period period of of my my life; life; i i may may say, say, with with the the turning-point turning-point of of my my existence. existence. copperfield, copperfield, my my dear dear fellow, fellow, how how do do you do?' do?' i i cannot cannot say say -- -- i i really really cannot cannot say say -- -- that that i i was was glad glad to to see see mr. mr. micawber micawber there; there; but but i i was was glad glad to to see see him him too, too, and and shook shook hands hands with with him, him, heartily, heartily, inquiring inquiring how how mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was. was. 'thank 'thank you,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, waving waving his his hand hand as as of of old, old, and and settling settling his his chin chin in in his his shirt-collar. shirt-collar. 'she 'she is is tolerably tolerably convalescent. convalescent. the the twins twins no no longer longer derive derive their their sustenance sustenance from from nature's nature's founts founts -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, in in one one of of his his bursts bursts of of confidence, confidence, 'they 'they are are weaned weaned -- -- and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber is, is, at at present, present, my my travelling travelling companion. companion. she she will will be be rejoiced, rejoiced, copperfield, copperfield, to to renew renew her her acquaintance acquaintance with with one one who who has has proved proved himself himself in in all all respects respects a a worthy worthy minister minister at at the the sacred sacred altar altar of of friendship.' friendship.' i i said said i i should should be be delighted delighted to to see see her. her. 'you are are very very good,' good,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. mr. mr. micawber micawber then then smiled, smiled, settled settled his his chin chin again, again, and and looked looked about about him. him. 'i 'i have have discovered discovered my my friend friend copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber micawber genteelly, genteelly, and and without without addressing addressing himself himself particularly particularly to to anyone, anyone, 'not 'not in in solitude, solitude, but but partaking partaking of of a a social social meal meal in in company company with with a a widow widow lady, lady, and and one one who who is is apparently apparently her her offspring offspring -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, in in another another of of his his bursts bursts of of confidence, confidence, 'her 'her son. son. i i shall shall esteem esteem it it an an honour honour to to be be presented.' presented.' i i could could do do no no less, less, under under these these circumstances, circumstances, than than make make mr. mr. micawber micawber known known to to uriah uriah heep heep and and his his mother; mother; which which i i accordingly accordingly did. did. as as they they abased abased themselves themselves before before him, him, mr. mr. micawber micawber took took a a seat, seat, and and waved waved his his hand hand in in his his most most courtly courtly manner. manner. 'any 'any friend friend of of my my friend friend copperfield's,' copperfield's,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'has 'has a a personal personal claim claim upon upon myself.' myself.' 'we 'we are are too too umble, umble, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. heep, heep, 'my 'my son son and and me, me, to to be be the the friends friends of of master master copperfield. copperfield. he he has has been been so so good good as as take take his his tea tea with with us, us, and and we we are are thankful thankful to to him him for for his his company, company, also also to to you, sir, sir, for for your your notice.' notice.' 'ma'am,' 'ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a bow, bow, 'you are are very very obliging: obliging: and and what what are are you doing, doing, copperfield? copperfield? still still in in the the wine wine trade?' trade?' i i was was excessively excessively anxious anxious to to get get mr. mr. micawber micawber away; away; and and replied, replied, with with my my hat hat in in my my hand, hand, and and a a very very red red face, face, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, that that i i was was a a pupil pupil at at doctor doctor strong's. strong's. 'a 'a pupil?' pupil?' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, raising raising his his eyebrows. eyebrows. 'i 'i am am extremely extremely happy happy to to hear hear it. it. although although a a mind mind like like my my friend friend copperfield's' copperfield's' -- -- to to uriah uriah and and mrs. mrs. heep heep -- -- 'does 'does not not require require that that cultivation cultivation which, which, without without his his knowledge knowledge of of men men and and things, things, it it would would require, require, still still it it is is a a rich rich soil soil teeming teeming with with latent latent vegetation vegetation -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, smiling, smiling, in in another another burst burst of of confidence, confidence, 'it 'it is is an an intellect intellect capable capable of of getting getting up up the the classics classics to to any any extent.' extent.' uriah, uriah, with with his his long long hands hands slowly slowly twining twining over over one one another, another, made made a a ghastly ghastly writhe writhe from from the the waist waist upwards, upwards, to to express express his his concurrence concurrence in in this this estimation estimation of of me. me. 'shall 'shall we we go go and and see see mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, sir?' sir?' i i said, said, to to get get mr. mr. micawber micawber away. away. 'if 'if you will will do do her her that that favour, favour, copperfield,' copperfield,' replied replied mr. mr. micawber, micawber, rising. rising. 'i 'i have have no no scruple scruple in in saying, saying, in in the the presence presence of of our our friends friends here, here, that that i i am am a a man man who who has, has, for for some some years, years, contended contended against against the the pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary difficulties.' difficulties.' i i knew knew he he was was certain certain to to say say something something of of this this kind; kind; he he always always would would be be so so boastful boastful about about his his difficulties. difficulties. 'sometimes 'sometimes i i have have risen risen superior superior to to my my difficulties. difficulties. sometimes sometimes my my difficulties difficulties have have -- -- in in short, short, have have floored floored me. me. there there have have been been times times when when i i have have administered administered a a succession succession of of facers facers to to them; them; there there have have been been times times when when they they have have been been too too many many for for me, me, and and i i have have given given in, in, and and said said to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, in in the the words words of of cato, cato, "plato, "plato, thou thou reasonest reasonest well. well. it's it's all all up up now. now. i i can can show show fight fight no no more." more." but but at at no no time time of of my my life,' life,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'have 'have i i enjoyed enjoyed a a higher higher degree degree of of satisfaction satisfaction than than in in pouring pouring my my griefs griefs (if (if i i may may describe describe difficulties, difficulties, chiefly chiefly arising arising out out of of warrants warrants of of attorney attorney and and promissory promissory notes notes at at two two and and four four months, months, by by that that word) word) into into the the bosom bosom of of my my friend friend copperfield.' copperfield.' mr. mr. micawber micawber closed closed this this handsome handsome tribute tribute by by saying, saying, 'mr. 'mr. heep! heep! good good evening. evening. mrs. mrs. heep! heep! your your servant,' servant,' and and then then walking walking out out with with me me in in his his most most fashionable fashionable manner, manner, making making a a good good deal deal of of noise noise on on the the pavement pavement with with his his shoes, shoes, and and humming humming a a tune tune as as we we went. went. it it was was a a little little inn inn where where mr. mr. micawber micawber put put up, up, and and he he occupied occupied a a little little room room in in it, it, partitioned partitioned off off from from the the commercial commercial room, room, and and strongly strongly flavoured flavoured with with tobacco-smoke. tobacco-smoke. i i think think it it was was over over the the kitchen, kitchen, because because a a warm warm greasy greasy smell smell appeared appeared to to come come up up through through the the chinks chinks in in the the floor, floor, and and there there was was a a flabby flabby perspiration perspiration on on the the walls. walls. i i know know it it was was near near the the bar, bar, on on account account of of the the smell smell of of spirits spirits and and jingling jingling of of glasses. glasses. here, here, recumbent recumbent on on a a small small sofa, sofa, underneath underneath a a picture picture of of a a race-horse, race-horse, with with her her head head close close to to the the fire, fire, and and her her feet feet pushing pushing the the mustard mustard off off the the dumb-waiter dumb-waiter at at the the other other end end of of the the room, room, was was mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, to to whom whom mr. mr. micawber micawber entered entered first, first, saying, saying, 'my 'my dear, dear, allow allow me me to to introduce introduce to to you a a pupil pupil of of doctor doctor strong's.' strong's.' i i noticed, noticed, by by the the by, by, that that although although mr. mr. micawber micawber was was just just as as much much confused confused as as ever ever about about my my age age and and standing, standing, he he always always remembered, remembered, as as a a genteel genteel thing, thing, that that i i was was a a pupil pupil of of doctor doctor strong's. strong's. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was amazed, amazed, but but very very glad glad to to see see me. me. i i was was very very glad glad to to see see her her too, too, and, and, after after an an affectionate affectionate greeting greeting on on both both sides, sides, sat sat down down on on the the small small sofa sofa near near her. her. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'if 'if you will will mention mention to to copperfield copperfield what what our our present present position position is, is, which which i i have have no no doubt doubt he he will will like like to to know, know, i i will will go go and and look look at at the the paper paper the the while, while, and and see see whether whether anything anything turns turns up up among among the the advertisements.' advertisements.' 'i 'i thought thought you were were at at plymouth, plymouth, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i said said to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, as as he he went went out. out. 'my 'my dear dear master master copperfield,' copperfield,' she she replied, replied, 'we 'we went went to to plymouth.' plymouth.' 'to 'to be be on on the the spot,' spot,' i i hinted. hinted. 'just 'just so,' so,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'to 'to be be on on the the spot. spot. but, but, the the truth truth is, is, talent talent is is not not wanted wanted in in the the custom custom house. house. the the local local influence influence of of my my family family was was quite quite unavailing unavailing to to obtain obtain any any employment employment in in that that department, department, for for a a man man of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities. abilities. they they would would rather rather not not have have a a man man of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities. abilities. he he would would only only show show the the deficiency deficiency of of the the others. others. apart apart from from which,' which,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i will will not not disguise disguise from from you, my my dear dear master master copperfield, copperfield, that that when when that that branch branch of of my my family family which which is is settled settled in in plymouth, plymouth, became became aware aware that that mr. mr. micawber micawber was was accompanied accompanied by by myself, myself, and and by by little little wilkins wilkins and and his his sister, sister, and and by by the the twins, twins, they they did did not not receive receive him him with with that that ardour ardour which which he he might might have have expected, expected, being being so so newly newly released released from from captivity. captivity. in in fact,' fact,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, lowering lowering her her voice, voice, -- -- 'this 'this is is between between ourselves ourselves -- -- our our reception reception was was cool.' cool.' 'dear 'dear me!' me!' i i said. said. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'it 'it is is truly truly painful painful to to contemplate contemplate mankind mankind in in such such an an aspect, aspect, master master copperfield, copperfield, but but our our reception reception was, was, decidedly, decidedly, cool. cool. there there is is no no doubt doubt about about it. it. in in fact, fact, that that branch branch of of my my family family which which is is settled settled in in plymouth plymouth became became quite quite personal personal to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, before before we we had had been been there there a a week.' week.' i i said, said, and and thought, thought, that that they they ought ought to to be be ashamed ashamed of of themselves. themselves. 'still, 'still, so so it it was,' was,' continued continued mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'under 'under such such circumstances, circumstances, what what could could a a man man of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's spirit spirit do? do? but but one one obvious obvious course course was was left. left. to to borrow, borrow, of of that that branch branch of of my my family, family, the the money money to to return return to to london, london, and and to to return return at at any any sacrifice.' sacrifice.' 'then 'then you all all came came back back again, again, ma'am?' ma'am?' i i said. said. 'we 'we all all came came back back again,' again,' replied replied mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'since 'since then, then, i i have have consulted consulted other other branches branches of of my my family family on on the the course course which which it it is is most most expedient expedient for for mr. mr. micawber micawber to to take take -- -- for for i i maintain maintain that that he he must must take take some some course, course, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, argumentatively. argumentatively. 'it 'it is is clear clear that that a a family family of of six, six, not not including including a a domestic, domestic, cannot cannot live live upon upon air.' air.' 'certainly, 'certainly, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said i. i. 'the 'the opinion opinion of of those those other other branches branches of of my my family,' family,' pursued pursued mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'is, 'is, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should immediately immediately turn turn his his attention attention to to coals.' coals.' 'to 'to what, what, ma'am?' ma'am?' 'to 'to coals,' coals,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'to 'to the the coal coal trade. trade. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was induced induced to to think, think, on on inquiry, inquiry, that that there there might might be be an an opening opening for for a a man man of of his his talent talent in in the the medway medway coal coal trade. trade. then, then, as as mr. mr. micawber micawber very very properly properly said, said, the the first first step step to to be be taken taken clearly clearly was, was, to to come come and and see see the the medway. medway. which which we we came came and and saw. saw. i i say say "we", "we", master master copperfield; copperfield; for for i i never never will,' will,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber micawber with with emotion, emotion, 'i 'i never never will will desert desert mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' i i murmured murmured my my admiration admiration and and approbation. approbation. 'we 'we came,' came,' repeated repeated mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'and 'and saw saw the the medway. medway. my my opinion opinion of of the the coal coal trade trade on on that that river river is, is, that that it it may may require require talent, talent, but but that that it it certainly certainly requires requires capital. capital. talent, talent, mr. mr. micawber micawber has; has; capital, capital, mr. mr. micawber micawber has has not. not. we we saw, saw, i i think, think, the the greater greater part part of of the the medway; medway; and and that that is is my my individual individual conclusion. conclusion. being being so so near near here, here, mr. mr. micawber micawber was was of of opinion opinion that that it it would would be be rash rash not not to to come come on, on, and and see see the the cathedral. cathedral. firstly, firstly, on on account account of of its its being being so so well well worth worth seeing, seeing, and and our our never never having having seen seen it; it; and and secondly, secondly, on on account account of of the the great great probability probability of of something something turning turning up up in in a a cathedral cathedral town. town. we we have have been been here,' here,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'three 'three days. days. nothing nothing has, has, as as yet, yet, turned turned up; up; and and it it may may not not surprise surprise you, my my dear dear master master copperfield, copperfield, so so much much as as it it would would a a stranger, stranger, to to know know that that we we are are at at present present waiting waiting for for a a remittance remittance from from london, london, to to discharge discharge our our pecuniary pecuniary obligations obligations at at this this hotel. hotel. until until the the arrival arrival of of that that remittance,' remittance,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber micawber with with much much feeling, feeling, 'i 'i am am cut cut off off from from my my home home (i (i allude allude to to lodgings lodgings in in pentonville), pentonville), from from my my boy boy and and girl, girl, and and from from my my twins.' twins.' i i felt felt the the utmost utmost sympathy sympathy for for mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in this this anxious anxious extremity, extremity, and and said said as as much much to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who now now returned: returned: adding adding that that i i only only wished wished i i had had money money enough, enough, to to lend lend them them the the amount amount they they needed. needed. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's answer answer expressed expressed the the disturbance disturbance of of his his mind. mind. he he said, said, shaking shaking hands hands with with me, me, 'copperfield, 'copperfield, you are are a a true true friend; friend; but but when when the the worst worst comes comes to to the the worst, worst, no no man man is is without without a a friend friend who who is is possessed possessed of of shaving shaving materials.' materials.' at at this this dreadful dreadful hint hint mrs. mrs. micawber micawber threw threw her her arms arms round round mr. mr. micawber's micawber's neck neck and and entreated entreated him him to to be be calm. calm. he he wept; wept; but but so so far far recovered, recovered, almost almost immediately, immediately, as as to to ring ring the the bell bell for for the the waiter, waiter, and and bespeak bespeak a a hot hot kidney kidney pudding pudding and and a a plate plate of of shrimps shrimps for for breakfast breakfast in in the the morning. morning. when when i i took took my my leave leave of of them, them, they they both both pressed pressed me me so so much much to to come come and and dine dine before before they they went went away, away, that that i i could could not not refuse. refuse. but, but, as as i i knew knew i i could could not not come come next next day, day, when when i i should should have have a a good good deal deal to to prepare prepare in in the the evening, evening, mr. mr. micawber micawber arranged arranged that that he he would would call call at at doctor doctor strong's strong's in in the the course course of of the the morning morning (having (having a a presentiment presentiment that that the the remittance remittance would would arrive arrive by by that that post), post), and and propose propose the the day day after, after, if if it it would would suit suit me me better. better. accordingly accordingly i i was was called called out out of of school school next next forenoon, forenoon, and and found found mr. mr. micawber micawber in in the the parlour; parlour; who who had had called called to to say say that that the the dinner dinner would would take take place place as as proposed. proposed. when when i i asked asked him him if if the the remittance remittance had had come, come, he he pressed pressed my my hand hand and and departed. departed. as as i i was was looking looking out out of of window window that that same same evening, evening, it it surprised surprised me, me, and and made made me me rather rather uneasy, uneasy, to to see see mr. mr. micawber micawber and and uriah uriah heep heep walk walk past, past, arm arm in in arm: arm: uriah uriah humbly humbly sensible sensible of of the the honour honour that that was was done done him, him, and and mr. mr. micawber micawber taking taking a a bland bland delight delight in in extending extending his his patronage patronage to to uriah. uriah. but but i i was was still still more more surprised, surprised, when when i i went went to to the the little little hotel hotel next next day day at at the the appointed appointed dinner-hour, dinner-hour, which which was was four four o'clock, o'clock, to to find, find, from from what what mr. mr. micawber micawber said, said, that that he he had had gone gone home home with with uriah, uriah, and and had had drunk drunk brandy-and-water brandy-and-water at at mrs. mrs. heep's. heep's. 'and 'and i'll i'll tell tell you what, what, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'your 'your friend friend heep heep is is a a young young fellow fellow who who might might be be attorney-general. attorney-general. if if i i had had known known that that young young man, man, at at the the period period when when my my difficulties difficulties came came to to a a crisis, crisis, all all i i can can say say is, is, that that i i believe believe my my creditors creditors would would have have been been a a great great deal deal better better managed managed than than they they were.' were.' i i hardly hardly understood understood how how this this could could have have been, been, seeing seeing that that mr. mr. micawber micawber had had paid paid them them nothing nothing at at all all as as it it was; was; but but i i did did not not like like to to ask. ask. neither neither did did i i like like to to say, say, that that i i hoped hoped he he had had not not been been too too communicative communicative to to uriah; uriah; or or to to inquire inquire if if they they had had talked talked much much about about me. me. i i was was afraid afraid of of hurting hurting mr. mr. micawber's micawber's feelings, feelings, or, or, at at all all events, events, mrs. mrs. micawber's, micawber's, she she being being very very sensitive; sensitive; but but i i was was uncomfortable uncomfortable about about it, it, too, too, and and often often thought thought about about it it afterwards. afterwards. we we had had a a beautiful beautiful little little dinner. dinner. quite quite an an elegant elegant dish dish of of fish; fish; the the kidney-end kidney-end of of a a loin loin of of veal, veal, roasted; roasted; fried fried sausage-meat; sausage-meat; a a partridge, partridge, and and a a pudding. pudding. there there was was wine, wine, and and there there was was strong strong ale; ale; and and after after dinner dinner mrs. mrs. micawber micawber made made us us a a bowl bowl of of hot hot punch punch with with her her own own hands. hands. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was uncommonly uncommonly convivial. convivial. i i never never saw saw him him such such good good company. company. he he made made his his face face shine shine with with the the punch, punch, so so that that it it looked looked as as if if it it had had been been varnished varnished all all over. over. he he got got cheerfully cheerfully sentimental sentimental about about the the town, town, and and proposed proposed success success to to it; it; observing observing that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and himself himself had had been been made made extremely extremely snug snug and and comfortable comfortable there there and and that that he he never never should should forget forget the the agreeable agreeable hours hours they they had had passed passed in in canterbury. canterbury. he he proposed proposed me me afterwards; afterwards; and and he, he, and and mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and i, i, took took a a review review of of our our past past acquaintance, acquaintance, in in the the course course of of which which we we sold sold the the property property all all over over again. again. then then i i proposed proposed mrs. mrs. micawber: micawber: or, or, at at least, least, said, said, modestly, modestly, 'if 'if you'll you'll allow allow me, me, mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, i i shall shall now now have have the the pleasure pleasure of of drinking drinking your your health, health, ma'am.' ma'am.' on on which which mr. mr. micawber micawber delivered delivered an an eulogium eulogium on on mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's character, character, and and said said she she had had ever ever been been his his guide, guide, philosopher, philosopher, and and friend, friend, and and that that he he would would recommend recommend me, me, when when i i came came to to a a marrying marrying time time of of life, life, to to marry marry such such another another woman, woman, if if such such another another woman woman could could be be found. found. as as the the punch punch disappeared, disappeared, mr. mr. micawber micawber became became still still more more friendly friendly and and convivial. convivial. mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's spirits spirits becoming becoming elevated, elevated, too, too, we we sang sang 'auld 'auld lang lang syne'. syne'. when when we we came came to to 'here's 'here's a a hand, hand, my my trusty trusty frere', frere', we we all all joined joined hands hands round round the the table; table; and and when when we we declared declared we we would would 'take 'take a a right right gude gude willie willie waught', waught', and and hadn't hadn't the the least least idea idea what what it it meant, meant, we we were were really really affected. affected. in in a a word, word, i i never never saw saw anybody anybody so so thoroughly thoroughly jovial jovial as as mr. mr. micawber micawber was, was, down down to to the the very very last last moment moment of of the the evening, evening, when when i i took took a a hearty hearty farewell farewell of of himself himself and and his his amiable amiable wife. wife. consequently, consequently, i i was was not not prepared, prepared, at at seven seven o'clock o'clock next next morning, morning, to to receive receive the the following following communication, communication, dated dated half half past past nine nine in in the the evening; evening; a a quarter quarter of of an an hour hour after after i i had had left left him: him: -- -- 'my 'my dear dear young young friend, friend, 'the 'the die die is is cast cast -- -- all all is is over. over. hiding hiding the the ravages ravages of of care care with with a a sickly sickly mask mask of of mirth, mirth, i i have have not not informed informed you, this this evening, evening, that that there there is is no no hope hope of of the the remittance! remittance! under under these these circumstances, circumstances, alike alike humiliating humiliating to to endure, endure, humiliating humiliating to to contemplate, contemplate, and and humiliating humiliating to to relate, relate, i i have have discharged discharged the the pecuniary pecuniary liability liability contracted contracted at at this this establishment, establishment, by by giving giving a a note note of of hand, hand, made made payable payable fourteen fourteen days days after after date, date, at at my my residence, residence, pentonville, pentonville, london. london. when when it it becomes becomes due, due, it it will will not not be be taken taken up. up. the the result result is is destruction. destruction. the the bolt bolt is is impending, impending, and and the the tree tree must must fall. fall. 'let 'let the the wretched wretched man man who who now now addresses addresses you, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, be be a a beacon beacon to to you through through life. life. he he writes writes with with that that intention, intention, and and in in that that hope. hope. if if he he could could think think himself himself of of so so much much use, use, one one gleam gleam of of day day might, might, by by possibility, possibility, penetrate penetrate into into the the cheerless cheerless dungeon dungeon of of his his remaining remaining existence existence -- -- though though his his longevity longevity is, is, at at present present (to (to say say the the least least of of it), it), extremely extremely problematical. problematical. 'this 'this is is the the last last communication, communication, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, you will will ever ever receive receive 'from 'from 'the 'the 'beggared 'beggared outcast, outcast, 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber.' micawber.' i i was was so so shocked shocked by by the the contents contents of of this this heart-rending heart-rending letter, letter, that that i i ran ran off off directly directly towards towards the the little little hotel hotel with with the the intention intention of of taking taking it it on on my my way way to to doctor doctor strong's, strong's, and and trying trying to to soothe soothe mr. mr. micawber micawber with with a a word word of of comfort. comfort. but, but, half-way half-way there, there, i i met met the the london london coach coach with with mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber up up behind; behind; mr. mr. micawber, micawber, the the very very picture picture of of tranquil tranquil enjoyment, enjoyment, smiling smiling at at mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's conversation, conversation, eating eating walnuts walnuts out out of of a a paper paper bag, bag, with with a a bottle bottle sticking sticking out out of of his his breast breast pocket. pocket. as as they they did did not not see see me, me, i i thought thought it it best, best, all all things things considered, considered, not not to to see see them. them. so, so, with with a a great great weight weight taken taken off off my my mind, mind, i i turned turned into into a a by-street by-street that that was was the the nearest nearest way way to to school, school, and and felt, felt, upon upon the the whole, whole, relieved relieved that that they they were were gone; gone; though though i i still still liked liked them them very very much, much, nevertheless. nevertheless. chapter chapter 18. 18. a a retrospect retrospect my my school-days! school-days! the the silent silent gliding gliding on on of of my my existence existence -- -- the the unseen, unseen, unfelt unfelt progress progress of of my my life life -- -- from from childhood childhood up up to to youth! youth! let let me me think, think, as as i i look look back back upon upon that that flowing flowing water, water, now now a a dry dry channel channel overgrown overgrown with with leaves, leaves, whether whether there there are are any any marks marks along along its its course, course, by by which which i i can can remember remember how how it it ran. ran. a a moment, moment, and and i i occupy occupy my my place place in in the the cathedral, cathedral, where where we we all all went went together, together, every every sunday sunday morning, morning, assembling assembling first first at at school school for for that that purpose. purpose. the the earthy earthy smell, smell, the the sunless sunless air, air, the the sensation sensation of of the the world world being being shut shut out, out, the the resounding resounding of of the the organ organ through through the the black black and and white white arched arched galleries galleries and and aisles, aisles, are are wings wings that that take take me me back, back, and and hold hold me me hovering hovering above above those those days, days, in in a a half-sleeping half-sleeping and and half-waking half-waking dream. dream. i i am am not not the the last last boy boy in in the the school. school. i i have have risen risen in in a a few few months, months, over over several several heads. heads. but but the the first first boy boy seems seems to to me me a a mighty mighty creature, creature, dwelling dwelling afar afar off, off, whose whose giddy giddy height height is is unattainable. unattainable. agnes agnes says says 'no,' 'no,' but but i i say say 'yes,' 'yes,' and and tell tell her her that that she she little little thinks thinks what what stores stores of of knowledge knowledge have have been been mastered mastered by by the the wonderful wonderful being, being, at at whose whose place place she she thinks thinks i, i, even even i, i, weak weak aspirant, aspirant, may may arrive arrive in in time. time. he he is is not not my my private private friend friend and and public public patron, patron, as as steerforth steerforth was, was, but but i i hold hold him him in in a a reverential reverential respect. respect. i i chiefly chiefly wonder wonder what what he'll he'll be, be, when when he he leaves leaves doctor doctor strong's, strong's, and and what what mankind mankind will will do do to to maintain maintain any any place place against against him. him. but but who who is is this this that that breaks breaks upon upon me? me? this this is is miss miss shepherd, shepherd, whom whom i i love. love. miss miss shepherd shepherd is is a a boarder boarder at at the the misses misses nettingalls' nettingalls' establishment. establishment. i i adore adore miss miss shepherd. shepherd. she she is is a a little little girl, girl, in in a a spencer, spencer, with with a a round round face face and and curly curly flaxen flaxen hair. hair. the the misses misses nettingalls' nettingalls' young young ladies ladies come come to to the the cathedral cathedral too. too. i i cannot cannot look look upon upon my my book, book, for for i i must must look look upon upon miss miss shepherd. shepherd. when when the the choristers choristers chaunt, chaunt, i i hear hear miss miss shepherd. shepherd. in in the the service service i i mentally mentally insert insert miss miss shepherd's shepherd's name name -- -- i i put put her her in in among among the the royal royal family. family. at at home, home, in in my my own own room, room, i i am am sometimes sometimes moved moved to to cry cry out, out, 'oh, 'oh, miss miss shepherd!' shepherd!' in in a a transport transport of of love. love. for for some some time, time, i i am am doubtful doubtful of of miss miss shepherd's shepherd's feelings, feelings, but, but, at at length, length, fate fate being being propitious, propitious, we we meet meet at at the the dancing-school. dancing-school. i i have have miss miss shepherd shepherd for for my my partner. partner. i i touch touch miss miss shepherd's shepherd's glove, glove, and and feel feel a a thrill thrill go go up up the the right right arm arm of of my my jacket, jacket, and and come come out out at at my my hair. hair. i i say say nothing nothing to to miss miss shepherd, shepherd, but but we we understand understand each each other. other. miss miss shepherd shepherd and and myself myself live live but but to to be be united. united. why why do do i i secretly secretly give give miss miss shepherd shepherd twelve twelve brazil brazil nuts nuts for for a a present, present, i i wonder? wonder? they they are are not not expressive expressive of of affection, affection, they they are are difficult difficult to to pack pack into into a a parcel parcel of of any any regular regular shape, shape, they they are are hard hard to to crack, crack, even even in in room room doors, doors, and and they they are are oily oily when when cracked; cracked; yet yet i i feel feel that that they they are are appropriate appropriate to to miss miss shepherd. shepherd. soft, soft, seedy seedy biscuits, biscuits, also, also, i i bestow bestow upon upon miss miss shepherd; shepherd; and and oranges oranges innumerable. innumerable. once, once, i i kiss kiss miss miss shepherd shepherd in in the the cloak-room. cloak-room. ecstasy! ecstasy! what what are are my my agony agony and and indignation indignation next next day, day, when when i i hear hear a a flying flying rumour rumour that that the the misses misses nettingall nettingall have have stood stood miss miss shepherd shepherd in in the the stocks stocks for for turning turning in in her her toes! toes! miss miss shepherd shepherd being being the the one one pervading pervading theme theme and and vision vision of of my my life, life, how how do do i i ever ever come come to to break break with with her? her? i i can't can't conceive. conceive. and and yet yet a a coolness coolness grows grows between between miss miss shepherd shepherd and and myself. myself. whispers whispers reach reach me me of of miss miss shepherd shepherd having having said said she she wished wished i i wouldn't wouldn't stare stare so, so, and and having having avowed avowed a a preference preference for for master master jones jones -- -- for for jones! jones! a a boy boy of of no no merit merit whatever! whatever! the the gulf gulf between between me me and and miss miss shepherd shepherd widens. widens. at at last, last, one one day, day, i i meet meet the the misses misses nettingalls' nettingalls' establishment establishment out out walking. walking. miss miss shepherd shepherd makes makes a a face face as as she she goes goes by, by, and and laughs laughs to to her her companion. companion. all all is is over. over. the the devotion devotion of of a a life life -- -- it it seems seems a a life, life, it it is is all all the the same same -- -- is is at at an an end; end; miss miss shepherd shepherd comes comes out out of of the the morning morning service, service, and and the the royal royal family family know know her her no no more. more. i i am am higher higher in in the the school, school, and and no no one one breaks breaks my my peace. peace. i i am am not not at at all all polite, polite, now, now, to to the the misses misses nettingalls' nettingalls' young young ladies, ladies, and and shouldn't shouldn't dote dote on on any any of of them, them, if if they they were were twice twice as as many many and and twenty twenty times times as as beautiful. beautiful. i i think think the the dancing-school dancing-school a a tiresome tiresome affair, affair, and and wonder wonder why why the the girls girls can't can't dance dance by by themselves themselves and and leave leave us us alone. alone. i i am am growing growing great great in in latin latin verses, verses, and and neglect neglect the the laces laces of of my my boots. boots. doctor doctor strong strong refers refers to to me me in in public public as as a a promising promising young young scholar. scholar. mr. mr. dick dick is is wild wild with with joy, joy, and and my my aunt aunt remits remits me me a a guinea guinea by by the the next next post. post. the the shade shade of of a a young young butcher butcher rises, rises, like like the the apparition apparition of of an an armed armed head head in in macbeth. macbeth. who who is is this this young young butcher? butcher? he he is is the the terror terror of of the the youth youth of of canterbury. canterbury. there there is is a a vague vague belief belief abroad, abroad, that that the the beef beef suet suet with with which which he he anoints anoints his his hair hair gives gives him him unnatural unnatural strength, strength, and and that that he he is is a a match match for for a a man. man. he he is is a a broad-faced, broad-faced, bull-necked, bull-necked, young young butcher, butcher, with with rough rough red red cheeks, cheeks, an an ill-conditioned ill-conditioned mind, mind, and and an an injurious injurious tongue. tongue. his his main main use use of of this this tongue, tongue, is, is, to to disparage disparage doctor doctor strong's strong's young young gentlemen. gentlemen. he he says, says, publicly, publicly, that that if if they they want want anything anything he'll he'll give give it it 'em. 'em. he he names names individuals individuals among among them them (myself (myself included), included), whom whom he he could could undertake undertake to to settle settle with with one one hand, hand, and and the the other other tied tied behind behind him. him. he he waylays waylays the the smaller smaller boys boys to to punch punch their their unprotected unprotected heads, heads, and and calls calls challenges challenges after after me me in in the the open open streets. streets. for for these these sufficient sufficient reasons reasons i i resolve resolve to to fight fight the the butcher. butcher. it it is is a a summer summer evening, evening, down down in in a a green green hollow, hollow, at at the the corner corner of of a a wall. wall. i i meet meet the the butcher butcher by by appointment. appointment. i i am am attended attended by by a a select select body body of of our our boys; boys; the the butcher, butcher, by by two two other other butchers, butchers, a a young young publican, publican, and and a a sweep. sweep. the the preliminaries preliminaries are are adjusted, adjusted, and and the the butcher butcher and and myself myself stand stand face face to to face. face. in in a a moment moment the the butcher butcher lights lights ten ten thousand thousand candles candles out out of of my my left left eyebrow. eyebrow. in in another another moment, moment, i i don't don't know know where where the the wall wall is, is, or or where where i i am, am, or or where where anybody anybody is. is. i i hardly hardly know know which which is is myself myself and and which which the the butcher, butcher, we we are are always always in in such such a a tangle tangle and and tussle, tussle, knocking knocking about about upon upon the the trodden trodden grass. grass. sometimes sometimes i i see see the the butcher, butcher, bloody bloody but but confident; confident; sometimes sometimes i i see see nothing, nothing, and and sit sit gasping gasping on on my my second's second's knee; knee; sometimes sometimes i i go go in in at at the the butcher butcher madly, madly, and and cut cut my my knuckles knuckles open open against against his his face, face, without without appearing appearing to to discompose discompose him him at at all. all. at at last last i i awake, awake, very very queer queer about about the the head, head, as as from from a a giddy giddy sleep, sleep, and and see see the the butcher butcher walking walking off, off, congratulated congratulated by by the the two two other other butchers butchers and and the the sweep sweep and and publican, publican, and and putting putting on on his his coat coat as as he he goes; goes; from from which which i i augur, augur, justly, justly, that that the the victory victory is is his. his. i i am am taken taken home home in in a a sad sad plight, plight, and and i i have have beef-steaks beef-steaks put put to to my my eyes, eyes, and and am am rubbed rubbed with with vinegar vinegar and and brandy, brandy, and and find find a a great great puffy puffy place place bursting bursting out out on on my my upper upper lip, lip, which which swells swells immoderately. immoderately. for for three three or or four four days days i i remain remain at at home, home, a a very very ill-looking ill-looking subject, subject, with with a a green green shade shade over over my my eyes; eyes; and and i i should should be be very very dull, dull, but but that that agnes agnes is is a a sister sister to to me, me, and and condoles condoles with with me, me, and and reads reads to to me, me, and and makes makes the the time time light light and and happy. happy. agnes agnes has has my my confidence confidence completely, completely, always; always; i i tell tell her her all all about about the the butcher, butcher, and and the the wrongs wrongs he he has has heaped heaped upon upon me; me; she she thinks thinks i i couldn't couldn't have have done done otherwise otherwise than than fight fight the the butcher, butcher, while while she she shrinks shrinks and and trembles trembles at at my my having having fought fought him. him. time time has has stolen stolen on on unobserved, unobserved, for for adams adams is is not not the the head-boy head-boy in in the the days days that that are are come come now, now, nor nor has has he he been been this this many many and and many many a a day. day. adams adams has has left left the the school school so so long, long, that that when when he he comes comes back, back, on on a a visit visit to to doctor doctor strong, strong, there there are are not not many many there, there, besides besides myself, myself, who who know know him. him. adams adams is is going going to to be be called called to to the the bar bar almost almost directly, directly, and and is is to to be be an an advocate, advocate, and and to to wear wear a a wig. wig. i i am am surprised surprised to to find find him him a a meeker meeker man man than than i i had had thought, thought, and and less less imposing imposing in in appearance. appearance. he he has has not not staggered staggered the the world world yet, yet, either; either; for for it it goes goes on on (as (as well well as as i i can can make make out) out) pretty pretty much much the the same same as as if if he he had had never never joined joined it. it. a a blank, blank, through through which which the the warriors warriors of of poetry poetry and and history history march march on on in in stately stately hosts hosts that that seem seem to to have have no no end end -- -- and and what what comes comes next! next! i i am am the the head-boy, head-boy, now! now! i i look look down down on on the the line line of of boys boys below below me, me, with with a a condescending condescending interest interest in in such such of of them them as as bring bring to to my my mind mind the the boy boy i i was was myself, myself, when when i i first first came came there. there. that that little little fellow fellow seems seems to to be be no no part part of of me; me; i i remember remember him him as as something something left left behind behind upon upon the the road road of of life life -- -- as as something something i i have have passed, passed, rather rather than than have have actually actually been been -- -- and and almost almost think think of of him him as as of of someone someone else. else. and and the the little little girl girl i i saw saw on on that that first first day day at at mr. mr. wickfield's, wickfield's, where where is is she? she? gone gone also. also. in in her her stead, stead, the the perfect perfect likeness likeness of of the the picture, picture, a a child child likeness likeness no no more, more, moves moves about about the the house; house; and and agnes agnes -- -- my my sweet sweet sister, sister, as as i i call call her her in in my my thoughts, thoughts, my my counsellor counsellor and and friend, friend, the the better better angel angel of of the the lives lives of of all all who who come come within within her her calm, calm, good, good, self-denying self-denying influence influence -- -- is is quite quite a a woman. woman. what what other other changes changes have have come come upon upon me, me, besides besides the the changes changes in in my my growth growth and and looks, looks, and and in in the the knowledge knowledge i i have have garnered garnered all all this this while? while? i i wear wear a a gold gold watch watch and and chain, chain, a a ring ring upon upon my my little little finger, finger, and and a a long-tailed long-tailed coat; coat; and and i i use use a a great great deal deal of of bear's bear's grease grease -- -- which, which, taken taken in in conjunction conjunction with with the the ring, ring, looks looks bad. bad. am am i i in in love love again? again? i i am. am. i i worship worship the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins. larkins. the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins is is not not a a little little girl. girl. she she is is a a tall, tall, dark, dark, black-eyed, black-eyed, fine fine figure figure of of a a woman. woman. the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins is is not not a a chicken; chicken; for for the the youngest youngest miss miss larkins larkins is is not not that, that, and and the the eldest eldest must must be be three three or or four four years years older. older. perhaps perhaps the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins may may be be about about thirty. thirty. my my passion passion for for her her is is beyond beyond all all bounds. bounds. the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins knows knows officers. officers. it it is is an an awful awful thing thing to to bear. bear. i i see see them them speaking speaking to to her her in in the the street. street. i i see see them them cross cross the the way way to to meet meet her, her, when when her her bonnet bonnet (she (she has has a a bright bright taste taste in in bonnets) bonnets) is is seen seen coming coming down down the the pavement, pavement, accompanied accompanied by by her her sister's sister's bonnet. bonnet. she she laughs laughs and and talks, talks, and and seems seems to to like like it. it. i i spend spend a a good good deal deal of of my my own own spare spare time time in in walking walking up up and and down down to to meet meet her. her. if if i i can can bow bow to to her her once once in in the the day day (i (i know know her her to to bow bow to, to, knowing knowing mr. mr. larkins), larkins), i i am am happier. happier. i i deserve deserve a a bow bow now now and and then. then. the the raging raging agonies agonies i i suffer suffer on on the the night night of of the the race race ball, ball, where where i i know know the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins will will be be dancing dancing with with the the military, military, ought ought to to have have some some compensation, compensation, if if there there be be even-handed even-handed justice justice in in the the world. world. my my passion passion takes takes away away my my appetite, appetite, and and makes makes me me wear wear my my newest newest silk silk neckerchief neckerchief continually. continually. i i have have no no relief relief but but in in putting putting on on my my best best clothes, clothes, and and having having my my boots boots cleaned cleaned over over and and over over again. again. i i seem, seem, then, then, to to be be worthier worthier of of the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins. larkins. everything everything that that belongs belongs to to her, her, or or is is connected connected with with her, her, is is precious precious to to me. me. mr. mr. larkins larkins (a (a gruff gruff old old gentleman gentleman with with a a double double chin, chin, and and one one of of his his eyes eyes immovable immovable in in his his head) head) is is fraught fraught with with interest interest to to me. me. when when i i can't can't meet meet his his daughter, daughter, i i go go where where i i am am likely likely to to meet meet him. him. to to say say 'how 'how do do you do, do, mr. mr. larkins? larkins? are are the the young young ladies ladies and and all all the the family family quite quite well?' well?' seems seems so so pointed, pointed, that that i i blush. blush. i i think think continually continually about about my my age. age. say say i i am am seventeen, seventeen, and and say say that that seventeen seventeen is is young young for for the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins, larkins, what what of of that? that? besides, besides, i i shall shall be be one-and-twenty one-and-twenty in in no no time time almost. almost. i i regularly regularly take take walks walks outside outside mr. mr. larkins's larkins's house house in in the the evening, evening, though though it it cuts cuts me me to to the the heart heart to to see see the the officers officers go go in, in, or or to to hear hear them them up up in in the the drawing-room, drawing-room, where where the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins plays plays the the harp. harp. i i even even walk, walk, on on two two or or three three occasions, occasions, in in a a sickly, sickly, spoony spoony manner, manner, round round and and round round the the house house after after the the family family are are gone gone to to bed, bed, wondering wondering which which is is the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins's larkins's chamber chamber (and (and pitching, pitching, i i dare dare say say now, now, on on mr. mr. larkins's larkins's instead); instead); wishing wishing that that a a fire fire would would burst burst out; out; that that the the assembled assembled crowd crowd would would stand stand appalled; appalled; that that i, i, dashing dashing through through them them with with a a ladder, ladder, might might rear rear it it against against her her window, window, save save her her in in my my arms, arms, go go back back for for something something she she had had left left behind, behind, and and perish perish in in the the flames. flames. for for i i am am generally generally disinterested disinterested in in my my love, love, and and think think i i could could be be content content to to make make a a figure figure before before miss miss larkins, larkins, and and expire. expire. generally, generally, but but not not always. always. sometimes sometimes brighter brighter visions visions rise rise before before me. me. when when i i dress dress (the (the occupation occupation of of two two hours), hours), for for a a great great ball ball given given at at the the larkins's larkins's (the (the anticipation anticipation of of three three weeks), weeks), i i indulge indulge my my fancy fancy with with pleasing pleasing images. images. i i picture picture myself myself taking taking courage courage to to make make a a declaration declaration to to miss miss larkins. larkins. i i picture picture miss miss larkins larkins sinking sinking her her head head upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, and and saying, saying, 'oh, 'oh, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, can can i i believe believe my my ears!' ears!' i i picture picture mr. mr. larkins larkins waiting waiting on on me me next next morning, morning, and and saying, saying, 'my 'my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, my my daughter daughter has has told told me me all. all. youth youth is is no no objection. objection. here here are are twenty twenty thousand thousand pounds. pounds. be be happy!' happy!' i i picture picture my my aunt aunt relenting, relenting, and and blessing blessing us; us; and and mr. mr. dick dick and and doctor doctor strong strong being being present present at at the the marriage marriage ceremony. ceremony. i i am am a a sensible sensible fellow, fellow, i i believe believe -- -- i i believe, believe, on on looking looking back, back, i i mean mean -- -- and and modest modest i i am am sure; sure; but but all all this this goes goes on on notwithstanding. notwithstanding. i i repair repair to to the the enchanted enchanted house, house, where where there there are are lights, lights, chattering, chattering, music, music, flowers, flowers, officers officers (i (i am am sorry sorry to to see), see), and and the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins, larkins, a a blaze blaze of of beauty. beauty. she she is is dressed dressed in in blue, blue, with with blue blue flowers flowers in in her her hair hair -- -- forget-me-nots forget-me-nots -- -- as as if if she she had had any any need need to to wear wear forget-me-nots. forget-me-nots. it it is is the the first first really really grown-up grown-up party party that that i i have have ever ever been been invited invited to, to, and and i i am am a a little little uncomfortable; uncomfortable; for for i i appear appear not not to to belong belong to to anybody, anybody, and and nobody nobody appears appears to to have have anything anything to to say say to to me, me, except except mr. mr. larkins, larkins, who who asks asks me me how how my my schoolfellows schoolfellows are, are, which which he he needn't needn't do, do, as as i i have have not not come come there there to to be be insulted. insulted. but but after after i i have have stood stood in in the the doorway doorway for for some some time, time, and and feasted feasted my my eyes eyes upon upon the the goddess goddess of of my my heart, heart, she she approaches approaches me me -- -- she, she, the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins! larkins! -- -- and and asks asks me me pleasantly, pleasantly, if if i i dance? dance? i i stammer, stammer, with with a a bow, bow, 'with 'with you, miss miss larkins.' larkins.' 'with 'with no no one one else?' else?' inquires inquires miss miss larkins. larkins. 'i 'i should should have have no no pleasure pleasure in in dancing dancing with with anyone anyone else.' else.' miss miss larkins larkins laughs laughs and and blushes blushes (or (or i i think think she she blushes), blushes), and and says, says, 'next 'next time time but but one, one, i i shall shall be be very very glad.' glad.' the the time time arrives. arrives. 'it 'it is is a a waltz, waltz, i i think,' think,' miss miss larkins larkins doubtfully doubtfully observes, observes, when when i i present present myself. myself. 'do 'do you waltz? waltz? if if not, not, captain captain bailey bailey -- -- ' ' but but i i do do waltz waltz (pretty (pretty well, well, too, too, as as it it happens), happens), and and i i take take miss miss larkins larkins out. out. i i take take her her sternly sternly from from the the side side of of captain captain bailey. bailey. he he is is wretched, wretched, i i have have no no doubt; doubt; but but he he is is nothing nothing to to me. me. i i have have been been wretched, wretched, too. too. i i waltz waltz with with the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins! larkins! i i don't don't know know where, where, among among whom, whom, or or how how long. long. i i only only know know that that i i swim swim about about in in space, space, with with a a blue blue angel, angel, in in a a state state of of blissful blissful delirium, delirium, until until i i find find myself myself alone alone with with her her in in a a little little room, room, resting resting on on a a sofa. sofa. she she admires admires a a flower flower (pink (pink camellia camellia japonica, japonica, price price half-a-crown), half-a-crown), in in my my button-hole. button-hole. i i give give it it her, her, and and say: say: 'i 'i ask ask an an inestimable inestimable price price for for it, it, miss miss larkins.' larkins.' 'indeed! 'indeed! what what is is that?' that?' returns returns miss miss larkins. larkins. 'a 'a flower flower of of yours, yours, that that i i may may treasure treasure it it as as a a miser miser does does gold.' gold.' 'you're 'you're a a bold bold boy,' boy,' says says miss miss larkins. larkins. 'there.' 'there.' she she gives gives it it me, me, not not displeased; displeased; and and i i put put it it to to my my lips, lips, and and then then into into my my breast. breast. miss miss larkins, larkins, laughing, laughing, draws draws her her hand hand through through my my arm, arm, and and says, says, 'now 'now take take me me back back to to captain captain bailey.' bailey.' i i am am lost lost in in the the recollection recollection of of this this delicious delicious interview, interview, and and the the waltz, waltz, when when she she comes comes to to me me again, again, with with a a plain plain elderly elderly gentleman gentleman who who has has been been playing playing whist whist all all night, night, upon upon her her arm, arm, and and says: says: 'oh! 'oh! here here is is my my bold bold friend! friend! mr. mr. chestle chestle wants wants to to know know you, mr. mr. copperfield.' copperfield.' i i feel feel at at once once that that he he is is a a friend friend of of the the family, family, and and am am much much gratified. gratified. 'i 'i admire admire your your taste, taste, sir,' sir,' says says mr. mr. chestle. chestle. 'it 'it does does you credit. credit. i i suppose suppose you don't don't take take much much interest interest in in hops; hops; but but i i am am a a pretty pretty large large grower grower myself; myself; and and if if you ever ever like like to to come come over over to to our our neighbourhood neighbourhood -- -- neighbourhood neighbourhood of of ashford ashford -- -- and and take take a a run run about about our our place, place, -- -- we we shall shall be be glad glad for for you to to stop stop as as long long as as you like.' like.' i i thank thank mr. mr. chestle chestle warmly, warmly, and and shake shake hands. hands. i i think think i i am am in in a a happy happy dream. dream. i i waltz waltz with with the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins larkins once once again. again. she she says says i i waltz waltz so so well! well! i i go go home home in in a a state state of of unspeakable unspeakable bliss, bliss, and and waltz waltz in in imagination, imagination, all all night night long, long, with with my my arm arm round round the the blue blue waist waist of of my my dear dear divinity. divinity. for for some some days days afterwards, afterwards, i i am am lost lost in in rapturous rapturous reflections; reflections; but but i i neither neither see see her her in in the the street, street, nor nor when when i i call. call. i i am am imperfectly imperfectly consoled consoled for for this this disappointment disappointment by by the the sacred sacred pledge, pledge, the the perished perished flower. flower. 'trotwood,' 'trotwood,' says says agnes, agnes, one one day day after after dinner. dinner. 'who 'who do do you think think is is going going to to be be married married tomorrow? tomorrow? someone someone you admire.' admire.' 'not 'not you, i i suppose, suppose, agnes?' agnes?' 'not 'not me!' me!' raising raising her her cheerful cheerful face face from from the the music music she she is is copying. copying. 'do 'do you hear hear him, him, papa? papa? -- -- the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins.' larkins.' 'to 'to -- -- to to captain captain bailey?' bailey?' i i have have just just enough enough power power to to ask. ask. 'no; 'no; to to no no captain. captain. to to mr. mr. chestle, chestle, a a hop-grower.' hop-grower.' i i am am terribly terribly dejected dejected for for about about a a week week or or two. two. i i take take off off my my ring, ring, i i wear wear my my worst worst clothes, clothes, i i use use no no bear's bear's grease, grease, and and i i frequently frequently lament lament over over the the late late miss miss larkins's larkins's faded faded flower. flower. being, being, by by that that time, time, rather rather tired tired of of this this kind kind of of life, life, and and having having received received new new provocation provocation from from the the butcher, butcher, i i throw throw the the flower flower away, away, go go out out with with the the butcher, butcher, and and gloriously gloriously defeat defeat him. him. this, this, and and the the resumption resumption of of my my ring, ring, as as well well as as of of the the bear's bear's grease grease in in moderation, moderation, are are the the last last marks marks i i can can discern, discern, now, now, in in my my progress progress to to seventeen. seventeen. chapter chapter 19. 19. i i look look about about me, me, and and make make a a discovery discovery i i am am doubtful doubtful whether whether i i was was at at heart heart glad glad or or sorry, sorry, when when my my school-days school-days drew drew to to an an end, end, and and the the time time came came for for my my leaving leaving doctor doctor strong's. strong's. i i had had been been very very happy happy there, there, i i had had a a great great attachment attachment for for the the doctor, doctor, and and i i was was eminent eminent and and distinguished distinguished in in that that little little world. world. for for these these reasons reasons i i was was sorry sorry to to go; go; but but for for other other reasons, reasons, unsubstantial unsubstantial enough, enough, i i was was glad. glad. misty misty ideas ideas of of being being a a young young man man at at my my own own disposal, disposal, of of the the importance importance attaching attaching to to a a young young man man at at his his own own disposal, disposal, of of the the wonderful wonderful things things to to be be seen seen and and done done by by that that magnificent magnificent animal, animal, and and the the wonderful wonderful effects effects he he could could not not fail fail to to make make upon upon society, society, lured lured me me away. away. so so powerful powerful were were these these visionary visionary considerations considerations in in my my boyish boyish mind, mind, that that i i seem, seem, according according to to my my present present way way of of thinking, thinking, to to have have left left school school without without natural natural regret. regret. the the separation separation has has not not made made the the impression impression on on me, me, that that other other separations separations have. have. i i try try in in vain vain to to recall recall how how i i felt felt about about it, it, and and what what its its circumstances circumstances were; were; but but it it is is not not momentous momentous in in my my recollection. recollection. i i suppose suppose the the opening opening prospect prospect confused confused me. me. i i know know that that my my juvenile juvenile experiences experiences went went for for little little or or nothing nothing then; then; and and that that life life was was more more like like a a great great fairy fairy story, story, which which i i was was just just about about to to begin begin to to read, read, than than anything anything else. else. my my aunt aunt and and i i had had held held many many grave grave deliberations deliberations on on the the calling calling to to which which i i should should be be devoted. devoted. for for a a year year or or more more i i had had endeavoured endeavoured to to find find a a satisfactory satisfactory answer answer to to her her often-repeated often-repeated question, question, 'what 'what i i would would like like to to be?' be?' but but i i had had no no particular particular liking, liking, that that i i could could discover, discover, for for anything. anything. if if i i could could have have been been inspired inspired with with a a knowledge knowledge of of the the science science of of navigation, navigation, taken taken the the command command of of a a fast-sailing fast-sailing expedition, expedition, and and gone gone round round the the world world on on a a triumphant triumphant voyage voyage of of discovery, discovery, i i think think i i might might have have considered considered myself myself completely completely suited. suited. but, but, in in the the absence absence of of any any such such miraculous miraculous provision, provision, my my desire desire was was to to apply apply myself myself to to some some pursuit pursuit that that would would not not lie lie too too heavily heavily upon upon her her purse; purse; and and to to do do my my duty duty in in it, it, whatever whatever it it might might be. be. mr. mr. dick dick had had regularly regularly assisted assisted at at our our councils, councils, with with a a meditative meditative and and sage sage demeanour. demeanour. he he never never made made a a suggestion suggestion but but once; once; and and on on that that occasion occasion (i (i don't don't know know what what put put it it in in his his head), head), he he suddenly suddenly proposed proposed that that i i should should be be 'a 'a brazier'. brazier'. my my aunt aunt received received this this proposal proposal so so very very ungraciously, ungraciously, that that he he never never ventured ventured on on a a second; second; but but ever ever afterwards afterwards confined confined himself himself to to looking looking watchfully watchfully at at her her for for her her suggestions, suggestions, and and rattling rattling his his money. money. 'trot, 'trot, i i tell tell you what, what, my my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt, aunt, one one morning morning in in the the christmas christmas season season when when i i left left school: school: 'as 'as this this knotty knotty point point is is still still unsettled, unsettled, and and as as we we must must not not make make a a mistake mistake in in our our decision decision if if we we can can help help it, it, i i think think we we had had better better take take a a little little breathing-time. breathing-time. in in the the meanwhile, meanwhile, you must must try try to to look look at at it it from from a a new new point point of of view, view, and and not not as as a a schoolboy.' schoolboy.' 'i 'i will, will, aunt.' aunt.' 'it 'it has has occurred occurred to to me,' me,' pursued pursued my my aunt, aunt, 'that 'that a a little little change, change, and and a a glimpse glimpse of of life life out out of of doors, doors, may may be be useful useful in in helping helping you to to know know your your own own mind, mind, and and form form a a cooler cooler judgement. judgement. suppose suppose you were were to to go go down down into into the the old old part part of of the the country country again, again, for for instance, instance, and and see see that that -- -- that that out-of-the-way out-of-the-way woman woman with with the the savagest savagest of of names,' names,' said said my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose, nose, for for she she could could never never thoroughly thoroughly forgive forgive peggotty peggotty for for being being so so called. called. 'of 'of all all things things in in the the world, world, aunt, aunt, i i should should like like it it best!' best!' 'well,' 'well,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'that's 'that's lucky, lucky, for for i i should should like like it it too. too. but but it's it's natural natural and and rational rational that that you should should like like it. it. and and i i am am very very well well persuaded persuaded that that whatever whatever you do, do, trot, trot, will will always always be be natural natural and and rational.' rational.' 'i 'i hope hope so, so, aunt.' aunt.' 'your 'your sister, sister, betsey betsey trotwood,' trotwood,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'would 'would have have been been as as natural natural and and rational rational a a girl girl as as ever ever breathed. breathed. you'll you'll be be worthy worthy of of her, her, won't won't you?' 'i 'i hope hope i i shall shall be be worthy worthy of of you, aunt. aunt. that that will will be be enough enough for for me.' me.' 'it's 'it's a a mercy mercy that that poor poor dear dear baby baby of of a a mother mother of of yours yours didn't didn't live,' live,' said said my my aunt, aunt, looking looking at at me me approvingly, approvingly, 'or 'or she'd she'd have have been been so so vain vain of of her her boy boy by by this this time, time, that that her her soft soft little little head head would would have have been been completely completely turned, turned, if if there there was was anything anything of of it it left left to to turn.' turn.' (my (my aunt aunt always always excused excused any any weakness weakness of of her her own own in in my my behalf, behalf, by by transferring transferring it it in in this this way way to to my my poor poor mother.) mother.) 'bless 'bless me, me, trotwood, trotwood, how how you do do remind remind me me of of her!' her!' 'pleasantly, 'pleasantly, i i hope, hope, aunt?' aunt?' said said i. i. 'he's 'he's as as like like her, her, dick,' dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, emphatically, emphatically, 'he's 'he's as as like like her, her, as as she she was was that that afternoon afternoon before before she she began began to to fret fret -- -- bless bless my my heart, heart, he's he's as as like like her, her, as as he he can can look look at at me me out out of of his his two two eyes!' eyes!' 'is 'is he he indeed?' indeed?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'and 'and he's he's like like david, david, too,' too,' said said my my aunt, aunt, decisively. decisively. 'he 'he is is very very like like david!' david!' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'but 'but what what i i want want you to to be, be, trot,' trot,' resumed resumed my my aunt, aunt, ' ' -- -- i i don't don't mean mean physically, physically, but but morally; morally; you are are very very well well physically physically -- -- is, is, a a firm firm fellow. fellow. a a fine fine firm firm fellow, fellow, with with a a will will of of your your own. own. with with resolution,' resolution,' said said my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her cap cap at at me, me, and and clenching clenching her her hand. hand. 'with 'with determination. determination. with with character, character, trot trot -- -- with with strength strength of of character character that that is is not not to to be be influenced, influenced, except except on on good good reason, reason, by by anybody, anybody, or or by by anything. anything. that's that's what what i i want want you to to be. be. that's that's what what your your father father and and mother mother might might both both have have been, been, heaven heaven knows, knows, and and been been the the better better for for it.' it.' i i intimated intimated that that i i hoped hoped i i should should be be what what she she described. described. 'that 'that you may may begin, begin, in in a a small small way, way, to to have have a a reliance reliance upon upon yourself, yourself, and and to to act act for for yourself,' yourself,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'i 'i shall shall send send you upon upon your your trip, trip, alone. alone. i i did did think, think, once, once, of of mr. mr. dick's dick's going going with with you; but, but, on on second second thoughts, thoughts, i i shall shall keep keep him him to to take take care care of of me.' me.' mr. mr. dick, dick, for for a a moment, moment, looked looked a a little little disappointed; disappointed; until until the the honour honour and and dignity dignity of of having having to to take take care care of of the the most most wonderful wonderful woman woman in in the the world, world, restored restored the the sunshine sunshine to to his his face. face. 'besides,' 'besides,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'there's 'there's the the memorial memorial -- -- ' ' 'oh, 'oh, certainly,' certainly,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, in in a a hurry, hurry, 'i 'i intend, intend, trotwood, trotwood, to to get get that that done done immediately immediately -- -- it it really really must must be be done done immediately! immediately! and and then then it it will will go go in, in, you know know -- -- and and then then -- -- ' ' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, after after checking checking himself, himself, and and pausing pausing a a long long time, time, 'there'll 'there'll be be a a pretty pretty kettle kettle of of fish!' fish!' in in pursuance pursuance of of my my aunt's aunt's kind kind scheme, scheme, i i was was shortly shortly afterwards afterwards fitted fitted out out with with a a handsome handsome purse purse of of money, money, and and a a portmanteau, portmanteau, and and tenderly tenderly dismissed dismissed upon upon my my expedition. expedition. at at parting, parting, my my aunt aunt gave gave me me some some good good advice, advice, and and a a good good many many kisses; kisses; and and said said that that as as her her object object was was that that i i should should look look about about me, me, and and should should think think a a little, little, she she would would recommend recommend me me to to stay stay a a few few days days in in london, london, if if i i liked liked it, it, either either on on my my way way down down into into suffolk, suffolk, or or in in coming coming back. back. in in a a word, word, i i was was at at liberty liberty to to do do what what i i would, would, for for three three weeks weeks or or a a month; month; and and no no other other conditions conditions were were imposed imposed upon upon my my freedom freedom than than the the before-mentioned before-mentioned thinking thinking and and looking looking about about me, me, and and a a pledge pledge to to write write three three times times a a week week and and faithfully faithfully report report myself. myself. i i went went to to canterbury canterbury first, first, that that i i might might take take leave leave of of agnes agnes and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield (my (my old old room room in in whose whose house house i i had had not not yet yet relinquished), relinquished), and and also also of of the the good good doctor. doctor. agnes agnes was was very very glad glad to to see see me, me, and and told told me me that that the the house house had had not not been been like like itself itself since since i i had had left left it. it. 'i 'i am am sure sure i i am am not not like like myself myself when when i i am am away,' away,' said said i. i. 'i 'i seem seem to to want want my my right right hand, hand, when when i i miss miss you. though though that's that's not not saying saying much; much; for for there's there's no no head head in in my my right right hand, hand, and and no no heart. heart. everyone everyone who who knows knows you, consults consults with with you, and and is is guided guided by by you, agnes.' agnes.' 'everyone 'everyone who who knows knows me, me, spoils spoils me, me, i i believe,' believe,' she she answered, answered, smiling. smiling. 'no. 'no. it's it's because because you are are like like no no one one else. else. you are are so so good, good, and and so so sweet-tempered. sweet-tempered. you have have such such a a gentle gentle nature, nature, and and you are are always always right.' right.' 'you talk,' talk,' said said agnes, agnes, breaking breaking into into a a pleasant pleasant laugh, laugh, as as she she sat sat at at work, work, 'as 'as if if i i were were the the late late miss miss larkins.' larkins.' 'come! 'come! it's it's not not fair fair to to abuse abuse my my confidence,' confidence,' i i answered, answered, reddening reddening at at the the recollection recollection of of my my blue blue enslaver. enslaver. 'but 'but i i shall shall confide confide in in you, just just the the same, same, agnes. agnes. i i can can never never grow grow out out of of that. that. whenever whenever i i fall fall into into trouble, trouble, or or fall fall in in love, love, i i shall shall always always tell tell you, if if you'll you'll let let me me -- -- even even when when i i come come to to fall fall in in love love in in earnest.' earnest.' 'why, 'why, you have have always always been been in in earnest!' earnest!' said said agnes, agnes, laughing laughing again. again. 'oh! 'oh! that that was was as as a a child, child, or or a a schoolboy,' schoolboy,' said said i, i, laughing laughing in in my my turn, turn, not not without without being being a a little little shame-faced. shame-faced. 'times 'times are are altering altering now, now, and and i i suppose suppose i i shall shall be be in in a a terrible terrible state state of of earnestness earnestness one one day day or or other. other. my my wonder wonder is, is, that that you are are not not in in earnest earnest yourself, yourself, by by this this time, time, agnes.' agnes.' agnes agnes laughed laughed again, again, and and shook shook her her head. head. 'oh, 'oh, i i know know you are are not!' not!' said said i, i, 'because 'because if if you had had been been you would would have have told told me. me. or or at at least' least' -- -- for for i i saw saw a a faint faint blush blush in in her her face, face, 'you would would have have let let me me find find it it out out for for myself. myself. but but there there is is no no one one that that i i know know of, of, who who deserves deserves to to love love you, agnes. agnes. someone someone of of a a nobler nobler character, character, and and more more worthy worthy altogether altogether than than anyone anyone i i have have ever ever seen seen here, here, must must rise rise up, up, before before i i give give my my consent. consent. in in the the time time to to come, come, i i shall shall have have a a wary wary eye eye on on all all admirers; admirers; and and shall shall exact exact a a great great deal deal from from the the successful successful one, one, i i assure assure you.' we we had had gone gone on, on, so so far, far, in in a a mixture mixture of of confidential confidential jest jest and and earnest, earnest, that that had had long long grown grown naturally naturally out out of of our our familiar familiar relations, relations, begun begun as as mere mere children. children. but but agnes, agnes, now now suddenly suddenly lifting lifting up up her her eyes eyes to to mine, mine, and and speaking speaking in in a a different different manner, manner, said: said: 'trotwood, 'trotwood, there there is is something something that that i i want want to to ask ask you, and and that that i i may may not not have have another another opportunity opportunity of of asking asking for for a a long long time, time, perhaps perhaps -- -- something something i i would would ask, ask, i i think, think, of of no no one one else. else. have have you observed observed any any gradual gradual alteration alteration in in papa?' papa?' i i had had observed observed it, it, and and had had often often wondered wondered whether whether she she had had too. too. i i must must have have shown shown as as much, much, now, now, in in my my face; face; for for her her eyes eyes were were in in a a moment moment cast cast down, down, and and i i saw saw tears tears in in them. them. 'tell 'tell me me what what it it is,' is,' she she said, said, in in a a low low voice. voice. 'i 'i think think -- -- shall shall i i be be quite quite plain, plain, agnes, agnes, liking liking him him so so much?' much?' 'yes,' 'yes,' she she said. said. 'i 'i think think he he does does himself himself no no good good by by the the habit habit that that has has increased increased upon upon him him since since i i first first came came here. here. he he is is often often very very nervous nervous -- -- or or i i fancy fancy so.' so.' 'it 'it is is not not fancy,' fancy,' said said agnes, agnes, shaking shaking her her head. head. 'his 'his hand hand trembles, trembles, his his speech speech is is not not plain, plain, and and his his eyes eyes look look wild. wild. i i have have remarked remarked that that at at those those times, times, and and when when he he is is least least like like himself, himself, he he is is most most certain certain to to be be wanted wanted on on some some business.' business.' 'by 'by uriah,' uriah,' said said agnes. agnes. 'yes; 'yes; and and the the sense sense of of being being unfit unfit for for it, it, or or of of not not having having understood understood it, it, or or of of having having shown shown his his condition condition in in spite spite of of himself, himself, seems seems to to make make him him so so uneasy, uneasy, that that next next day day he he is is worse, worse, and and next next day day worse, worse, and and so so he he becomes becomes jaded jaded and and haggard. haggard. do do not not be be alarmed alarmed by by what what i i say, say, agnes, agnes, but but in in this this state state i i saw saw him, him, only only the the other other evening, evening, lay lay down down his his head head upon upon his his desk, desk, and and shed shed tears tears like like a a child.' child.' her her hand hand passed passed softly softly before before my my lips lips while while i i was was yet yet speaking, speaking, and and in in a a moment moment she she had had met met her her father father at at the the door door of of the the room, room, and and was was hanging hanging on on his his shoulder. shoulder. the the expression expression of of her her face, face, as as they they both both looked looked towards towards me, me, i i felt felt to to be be very very touching. touching. there there was was such such deep deep fondness fondness for for him, him, and and gratitude gratitude to to him him for for all all his his love love and and care, care, in in her her beautiful beautiful look; look; and and there there was was such such a a fervent fervent appeal appeal to to me me to to deal deal tenderly tenderly by by him, him, even even in in my my inmost inmost thoughts, thoughts, and and to to let let no no harsh harsh construction construction find find any any place place against against him; him; she she was, was, at at once, once, so so proud proud of of him him and and devoted devoted to to him, him, yet yet so so compassionate compassionate and and sorry, sorry, and and so so reliant reliant upon upon me me to to be be so, so, too; too; that that nothing nothing she she could could have have said said would would have have expressed expressed more more to to me, me, or or moved moved me me more. more. we we were were to to drink drink tea tea at at the the doctor's. doctor's. we we went went there there at at the the usual usual hour; hour; and and round round the the study study fireside fireside found found the the doctor, doctor, and and his his young young wife, wife, and and her her mother. mother. the the doctor, doctor, who who made made as as much much of of my my going going away away as as if if i i were were going going to to china, china, received received me me as as an an honoured honoured guest; guest; and and called called for for a a log log of of wood wood to to be be thrown thrown on on the the fire, fire, that that he he might might see see the the face face of of his his old old pupil pupil reddening reddening in in the the blaze. blaze. 'i 'i shall shall not not see see many many more more new new faces faces in in trotwood's trotwood's stead, stead, wickfield,' wickfield,' said said the the doctor, doctor, warming warming his his hands; hands; 'i 'i am am getting getting lazy, lazy, and and want want ease. ease. i i shall shall relinquish relinquish all all my my young young people people in in another another six six months, months, and and lead lead a a quieter quieter life.' life.' 'you have have said said so, so, any any time time these these ten ten years, years, doctor,' doctor,' mr. mr. wickfield wickfield answered. answered. 'but 'but now now i i mean mean to to do do it,' it,' returned returned the the doctor. doctor. 'my 'my first first master master will will succeed succeed me me -- -- i i am am in in earnest earnest at at last last -- -- so so you'll you'll soon soon have have to to arrange arrange our our contracts, contracts, and and to to bind bind us us firmly firmly to to them, them, like like a a couple couple of of knaves.' knaves.' 'and 'and to to take take care,' care,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, 'that 'that you're you're not not imposed imposed on, on, eh? eh? as as you certainly certainly would would be, be, in in any any contract contract you should should make make for for yourself. yourself. well! well! i i am am ready. ready. there there are are worse worse tasks tasks than than that, that, in in my my calling.' calling.' 'i 'i shall shall have have nothing nothing to to think think of of then,' then,' said said the the doctor, doctor, with with a a smile, smile, 'but 'but my my dictionary; dictionary; and and this this other other contract-bargain contract-bargain -- -- annie.' annie.' as as mr. mr. wickfield wickfield glanced glanced towards towards her, her, sitting sitting at at the the tea tea table table by by agnes, agnes, she she seemed seemed to to me me to to avoid avoid his his look look with with such such unwonted unwonted hesitation hesitation and and timidity, timidity, that that his his attention attention became became fixed fixed upon upon her, her, as as if if something something were were suggested suggested to to his his thoughts. thoughts. 'there 'there is is a a post post come come in in from from india, india, i i observe,' observe,' he he said, said, after after a a short short silence. silence. 'by 'by the the by! by! and and letters letters from from mr. mr. jack jack maldon!' maldon!' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'indeed!' 'indeed!' 'poor 'poor dear dear jack!' jack!' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, shaking shaking her her head. head. 'that 'that trying trying climate! climate! -- -- like like living, living, they they tell tell me, me, on on a a sand-heap, sand-heap, underneath underneath a a burning-glass! burning-glass! he he looked looked strong, strong, but but he he wasn't. wasn't. my my dear dear doctor, doctor, it it was was his his spirit, spirit, not not his his constitution, constitution, that that he he ventured ventured on on so so boldly. boldly. annie, annie, my my dear, dear, i i am am sure sure you must must perfectly perfectly recollect recollect that that your your cousin cousin never never was was strong strong -- -- not not what what can can be be called called robust, robust, you know,' know,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, with with emphasis, emphasis, and and looking looking round round upon upon us us generally, generally, ' ' -- -- from from the the time time when when my my daughter daughter and and himself himself were were children children together, together, and and walking walking about, about, arm-in-arm, arm-in-arm, the the livelong livelong day.' day.' annie, annie, thus thus addressed, addressed, made made no no reply. reply. 'do 'do i i gather gather from from what what you say, say, ma'am, ma'am, that that mr. mr. maldon maldon is is ill?' ill?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'ill!' 'ill!' replied replied the the old old soldier. soldier. 'my 'my dear dear sir, sir, he's he's all all sorts sorts of of things.' things.' 'except 'except well?' well?' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'except 'except well, well, indeed!' indeed!' said said the the old old soldier. soldier. 'he 'he has has had had dreadful dreadful strokes strokes of of the the sun, sun, no no doubt, doubt, and and jungle jungle fevers fevers and and agues, agues, and and every every kind kind of of thing thing you can can mention. mention. as as to to his his liver,' liver,' said said the the old old soldier soldier resignedly, resignedly, 'that, 'that, of of course, course, he he gave gave up up altogether, altogether, when when he he first first went went out!' out!' 'does 'does he he say say all all this?' this?' asked asked mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'say? 'say? my my dear dear sir,' sir,' returned returned mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, shaking shaking her her head head and and her her fan, fan, 'you little little know know my my poor poor jack jack maldon maldon when when you ask ask that that question. question. say? say? not not he. he. you might might drag drag him him at at the the heels heels of of four four wild wild horses horses first.' first.' 'mama!' 'mama!' said said mrs. mrs. strong. strong. 'annie, 'annie, my my dear,' dear,' returned returned her her mother, mother, 'once 'once for for all, all, i i must must really really beg beg that that you will will not not interfere interfere with with me, me, unless unless it it is is to to confirm confirm what what i i say. say. you know know as as well well as as i i do do that that your your cousin cousin maldon maldon would would be be dragged dragged at at the the heels heels of of any any number number of of wild wild horses horses -- -- why why should should i i confine confine myself myself to to four! four! i i won't won't confine confine myself myself to to four four -- -- eight, eight, sixteen, sixteen, two-and-thirty, two-and-thirty, rather rather than than say say anything anything calculated calculated to to overturn overturn the the doctor's doctor's plans.' plans.' 'wickfield's 'wickfield's plans,' plans,' said said the the doctor, doctor, stroking stroking his his face, face, and and looking looking penitently penitently at at his his adviser. adviser. 'that 'that is is to to say, say, our our joint joint plans plans for for him. him. i i said said myself, myself, abroad abroad or or at at home.' home.' 'and 'and i i said' said' added added mr. mr. wickfield wickfield gravely, gravely, 'abroad. 'abroad. i i was was the the means means of of sending sending him him abroad. abroad. it's it's my my responsibility.' responsibility.' 'oh! 'oh! responsibility!' responsibility!' said said the the old old soldier. soldier. 'everything 'everything was was done done for for the the best, best, my my dear dear mr. mr. wickfield; wickfield; everything everything was was done done for for the the kindest kindest and and best, best, we we know. know. but but if if the the dear dear fellow fellow can't can't live live there, there, he he can't can't live live there. there. and and if if he he can't can't live live there, there, he'll he'll die die there, there, sooner sooner than than he'll he'll overturn overturn the the doctor's doctor's plans. plans. i i know know him,' him,' said said the the old old soldier, soldier, fanning fanning herself, herself, in in a a sort sort of of calm calm prophetic prophetic agony, agony, 'and 'and i i know know he'll he'll die die there, there, sooner sooner than than he'll he'll overturn overturn the the doctor's doctor's plans.' plans.' 'well, 'well, well, well, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said the the doctor doctor cheerfully, cheerfully, 'i 'i am am not not bigoted bigoted to to my my plans, plans, and and i i can can overturn overturn them them myself. myself. i i can can substitute substitute some some other other plans. plans. if if mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon comes comes home home on on account account of of ill ill health, health, he he must must not not be be allowed allowed to to go go back, back, and and we we must must endeavour endeavour to to make make some some more more suitable suitable and and fortunate fortunate provision provision for for him him in in this this country.' country.' mrs. mrs. markleham markleham was was so so overcome overcome by by this this generous generous speech speech -- -- which, which, i i need need not not say, say, she she had had not not at at all all expected expected or or led led up up to to -- -- that that she she could could only only tell tell the the doctor doctor it it was was like like himself, himself, and and go go several several times times through through that that operation operation of of kissing kissing the the sticks sticks of of her her fan, fan, and and then then tapping tapping his his hand hand with with it. it. after after which which she she gently gently chid chid her her daughter daughter annie, annie, for for not not being being more more demonstrative demonstrative when when such such kindnesses kindnesses were were showered, showered, for for her her sake, sake, on on her her old old playfellow; playfellow; and and entertained entertained us us with with some some particulars particulars concerning concerning other other deserving deserving members members of of her her family, family, whom whom it it was was desirable desirable to to set set on on their their deserving deserving legs. legs. all all this this time, time, her her daughter daughter annie annie never never once once spoke, spoke, or or lifted lifted up up her her eyes. eyes. all all this this time, time, mr. mr. wickfield wickfield had had his his glance glance upon upon her her as as she she sat sat by by his his own own daughter's daughter's side. side. it it appeared appeared to to me me that that he he never never thought thought of of being being observed observed by by anyone; anyone; but but was was so so intent intent upon upon her, her, and and upon upon his his own own thoughts thoughts in in connexion connexion with with her, her, as as to to be be quite quite absorbed. absorbed. he he now now asked asked what what mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon had had actually actually written written in in reference reference to to himself, himself, and and to to whom whom he he had had written? written? 'why, 'why, here,' here,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, taking taking a a letter letter from from the the chimney-piece chimney-piece above above the the doctor's doctor's head, head, 'the 'the dear dear fellow fellow says says to to the the doctor doctor himself himself -- -- where where is is it? it? oh! oh! -- -- "i "i am am sorry sorry to to inform inform you that that my my health health is is suffering suffering severely, severely, and and that that i i fear fear i i may may be be reduced reduced to to the the necessity necessity of of returning returning home home for for a a time, time, as as the the only only hope hope of of restoration." restoration." that's that's pretty pretty plain, plain, poor poor fellow! fellow! his his only only hope hope of of restoration! restoration! but but annie's annie's letter letter is is plainer plainer still. still. annie, annie, show show me me that that letter letter again.' again.' 'not 'not now, now, mama,' mama,' she she pleaded pleaded in in a a low low tone. tone. 'my 'my dear, dear, you absolutely absolutely are, are, on on some some subjects, subjects, one one of of the the most most ridiculous ridiculous persons persons in in the the world,' world,' returned returned her her mother, mother, 'and 'and perhaps perhaps the the most most unnatural unnatural to to the the claims claims of of your your own own family. family. we we never never should should have have heard heard of of the the letter letter at at all, all, i i believe, believe, unless unless i i had had asked asked for for it it myself. myself. do do you call call that that confidence, confidence, my my love, love, towards towards doctor doctor strong? strong? i i am am surprised. surprised. you ought ought to to know know better.' better.' the the letter letter was was reluctantly reluctantly produced; produced; and and as as i i handed handed it it to to the the old old lady, lady, i i saw saw how how the the unwilling unwilling hand hand from from which which i i took took it, it, trembled. trembled. 'now 'now let let us us see,' see,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, putting putting her her glass glass to to her her eye, eye, 'where 'where the the passage passage is. is. "the "the remembrance remembrance of of old old times, times, my my dearest dearest annie" annie" -- -- and and so so forth forth -- -- it's it's not not there. there. "the "the amiable amiable old old proctor" proctor" -- -- who's who's he? he? dear dear me, me, annie, annie, how how illegibly illegibly your your cousin cousin maldon maldon writes, writes, and and how how stupid stupid i i am! am! "doctor," "doctor," of of course. course. ah! ah! amiable amiable indeed!' indeed!' here here she she left left off, off, to to kiss kiss her her fan fan again, again, and and shake shake it it at at the the doctor, doctor, who who was was looking looking at at us us in in a a state state of of placid placid satisfaction. satisfaction. 'now 'now i i have have found found it. it. "you may may not not be be surprised surprised to to hear, hear, annie," annie," -- -- no, no, to to be be sure, sure, knowing knowing that that he he never never was was really really strong; strong; what what did did i i say say just just now? now? -- -- "that "that i i have have undergone undergone so so much much in in this this distant distant place, place, as as to to have have decided decided to to leave leave it it at at all all hazards; hazards; on on sick sick leave, leave, if if i i can; can; on on total total resignation, resignation, if if that that is is not not to to be be obtained. obtained. what what i i have have endured, endured, and and do do endure endure here, here, is is insupportable." insupportable." and and but but for for the the promptitude promptitude of of that that best best of of creatures,' creatures,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, telegraphing telegraphing the the doctor doctor as as before, before, and and refolding refolding the the letter, letter, 'it 'it would would be be insupportable insupportable to to me me to to think think of.' of.' mr. mr. wickfield wickfield said said not not one one word, word, though though the the old old lady lady looked looked to to him him as as if if for for his his commentary commentary on on this this intelligence; intelligence; but but sat sat severely severely silent, silent, with with his his eyes eyes fixed fixed on on the the ground. ground. long long after after the the subject subject was was dismissed, dismissed, and and other other topics topics occupied occupied us, us, he he remained remained so; so; seldom seldom raising raising his his eyes, eyes, unless unless to to rest rest them them for for a a moment, moment, with with a a thoughtful thoughtful frown, frown, upon upon the the doctor, doctor, or or his his wife, wife, or or both. both. the the doctor doctor was was very very fond fond of of music. music. agnes agnes sang sang with with great great sweetness sweetness and and expression, expression, and and so so did did mrs. mrs. strong. strong. they they sang sang together, together, and and played played duets duets together, together, and and we we had had quite quite a a little little concert. concert. but but i i remarked remarked two two things: things: first, first, that that though though annie annie soon soon recovered recovered her her composure, composure, and and was was quite quite herself, herself, there there was was a a blank blank between between her her and and mr. mr. wickfield wickfield which which separated separated them them wholly wholly from from each each other; other; secondly, secondly, that that mr. mr. wickfield wickfield seemed seemed to to dislike dislike the the intimacy intimacy between between her her and and agnes, agnes, and and to to watch watch it it with with uneasiness. uneasiness. and and now, now, i i must must confess, confess, the the recollection recollection of of what what i i had had seen seen on on that that night night when when mr. mr. maldon maldon went went away, away, first first began began to to return return upon upon me me with with a a meaning meaning it it had had never never had, had, and and to to trouble trouble me. me. the the innocent innocent beauty beauty of of her her face face was was not not as as innocent innocent to to me me as as it it had had been; been; i i mistrusted mistrusted the the natural natural grace grace and and charm charm of of her her manner; manner; and and when when i i looked looked at at agnes agnes by by her her side, side, and and thought thought how how good good and and true true agnes agnes was, was, suspicions suspicions arose arose within within me me that that it it was was an an ill-assorted ill-assorted friendship. friendship. she she was was so so happy happy in in it it herself, herself, however, however, and and the the other other was was so so happy happy too, too, that that they they made made the the evening evening fly fly away away as as if if it it were were but but an an hour. hour. it it closed closed in in an an incident incident which which i i well well remember. remember. they they were were taking taking leave leave of of each each other, other, and and agnes agnes was was going going to to embrace embrace her her and and kiss kiss her, her, when when mr. mr. wickfield wickfield stepped stepped between between them, them, as as if if by by accident, accident, and and drew drew agnes agnes quickly quickly away. away. then then i i saw, saw, as as though though all all the the intervening intervening time time had had been been cancelled, cancelled, and and i i were were still still standing standing in in the the doorway doorway on on the the night night of of the the departure, departure, the the expression expression of of that that night night in in the the face face of of mrs. mrs. strong, strong, as as it it confronted confronted his. his. i i cannot cannot say say what what an an impression impression this this made made upon upon me, me, or or how how impossible impossible i i found found it, it, when when i i thought thought of of her her afterwards, afterwards, to to separate separate her her from from this this look, look, and and remember remember her her face face in in its its innocent innocent loveliness loveliness again. again. it it haunted haunted me me when when i i got got home. home. i i seemed seemed to to have have left left the the doctor's doctor's roof roof with with a a dark dark cloud cloud lowering lowering on on it. it. the the reverence reverence that that i i had had for for his his grey grey head, head, was was mingled mingled with with commiseration commiseration for for his his faith faith in in those those who who were were treacherous treacherous to to him, him, and and with with resentment resentment against against those those who who injured injured him. him. the the impending impending shadow shadow of of a a great great affliction, affliction, and and a a great great disgrace disgrace that that had had no no distinct distinct form form in in it it yet, yet, fell fell like like a a stain stain upon upon the the quiet quiet place place where where i i had had worked worked and and played played as as a a boy, boy, and and did did it it a a cruel cruel wrong. wrong. i i had had no no pleasure pleasure in in thinking, thinking, any any more, more, of of the the grave grave old old broad-leaved broad-leaved aloe-trees, aloe-trees, which which remained remained shut shut up up in in themselves themselves a a hundred hundred years years together, together, and and of of the the trim trim smooth smooth grass-plot, grass-plot, and and the the stone stone urns, urns, and and the the doctor's doctor's walk, walk, and and the the congenial congenial sound sound of of the the cathedral cathedral bell bell hovering hovering above above them them all. all. it it was was as as if if the the tranquil tranquil sanctuary sanctuary of of my my boyhood boyhood had had been been sacked sacked before before my my face, face, and and its its peace peace and and honour honour given given to to the the winds. winds. but but morning morning brought brought with with it it my my parting parting from from the the old old house, house, which which agnes agnes had had filled filled with with her her influence; influence; and and that that occupied occupied my my mind mind sufficiently. sufficiently. i i should should be be there there again again soon, soon, no no doubt; doubt; i i might might sleep sleep again again -- -- perhaps perhaps often often -- -- in in my my old old room; room; but but the the days days of of my my inhabiting inhabiting there there were were gone, gone, and and the the old old time time was was past. past. i i was was heavier heavier at at heart heart when when i i packed packed up up such such of of my my books books and and clothes clothes as as still still remained remained there there to to be be sent sent to to dover, dover, than than i i cared cared to to show show to to uriah uriah heep; heep; who who was was so so officious officious to to help help me, me, that that i i uncharitably uncharitably thought thought him him mighty mighty glad glad that that i i was was going. going. i i got got away away from from agnes agnes and and her her father, father, somehow, somehow, with with an an indifferent indifferent show show of of being being very very manly, manly, and and took took my my seat seat upon upon the the box box of of the the london london coach. coach. i i was was so so softened softened and and forgiving, forgiving, going going through through the the town, town, that that i i had had half half a a mind mind to to nod nod to to my my old old enemy enemy the the butcher, butcher, and and throw throw him him five five shillings shillings to to drink. drink. but but he he looked looked such such a a very very obdurate obdurate butcher butcher as as he he stood stood scraping scraping the the great great block block in in the the shop, shop, and and moreover, moreover, his his appearance appearance was was so so little little improved improved by by the the loss loss of of a a front front tooth tooth which which i i had had knocked knocked out, out, that that i i thought thought it it best best to to make make no no advances. advances. the the main main object object on on my my mind, mind, i i remember, remember, when when we we got got fairly fairly on on the the road, road, was was to to appear appear as as old old as as possible possible to to the the coachman, coachman, and and to to speak speak extremely extremely gruff. gruff. the the latter latter point point i i achieved achieved at at great great personal personal inconvenience; inconvenience; but but i i stuck stuck to to it, it, because because i i felt felt it it was was a a grown-up grown-up sort sort of of thing. thing. 'you are are going going through, through, sir?' sir?' said said the the coachman. coachman. 'yes, 'yes, william,' william,' i i said, said, condescendingly condescendingly (i (i knew knew him); him); 'i 'i am am going going to to london. london. i i shall shall go go down down into into suffolk suffolk afterwards.' afterwards.' 'shooting, 'shooting, sir?' sir?' said said the the coachman. coachman. he he knew knew as as well well as as i i did did that that it it was was just just as as likely, likely, at at that that time time of of year, year, i i was was going going down down there there whaling; whaling; but but i i felt felt complimented, complimented, too. too. 'i 'i don't don't know,' know,' i i said, said, pretending pretending to to be be undecided, undecided, 'whether 'whether i i shall shall take take a a shot shot or or not.' not.' 'birds 'birds is is got got wery wery shy, shy, i'm i'm told,' told,' said said william. william. 'so 'so i i understand,' understand,' said said i. i. 'is 'is suffolk suffolk your your county, county, sir?' sir?' asked asked william. william. 'yes,' 'yes,' i i said, said, with with some some importance. importance. 'suffolk's 'suffolk's my my county.' county.' 'i'm 'i'm told told the the dumplings dumplings is is uncommon uncommon fine fine down down there,' there,' said said william. william. i i was was not not aware aware of of it it myself, myself, but but i i felt felt it it necessary necessary to to uphold uphold the the institutions institutions of of my my county, county, and and to to evince evince a a familiarity familiarity with with them; them; so so i i shook shook my my head, head, as as much much as as to to say, say, 'i 'i believe believe you!' 'and 'and the the punches,' punches,' said said william. william. 'there's 'there's cattle! cattle! a a suffolk suffolk punch, punch, when when he's he's a a good good un, un, is is worth worth his his weight weight in in gold. gold. did did you ever ever breed breed any any suffolk suffolk punches punches yourself, yourself, sir?' sir?' 'n-no,' 'n-no,' i i said, said, 'not 'not exactly.' exactly.' 'here's 'here's a a gen'lm'n gen'lm'n behind behind me, me, i'll i'll pound pound it,' it,' said said william, william, 'as 'as has has bred bred 'em 'em by by wholesale.' wholesale.' the the gentleman gentleman spoken spoken of of was was a a gentleman gentleman with with a a very very unpromising unpromising squint, squint, and and a a prominent prominent chin, chin, who who had had a a tall tall white white hat hat on on with with a a narrow narrow flat flat brim, brim, and and whose whose close-fitting close-fitting drab drab trousers trousers seemed seemed to to button button all all the the way way up up outside outside his his legs legs from from his his boots boots to to his his hips. hips. his his chin chin was was cocked cocked over over the the coachman's coachman's shoulder, shoulder, so so near near to to me, me, that that his his breath breath quite quite tickled tickled the the back back of of my my head; head; and and as as i i looked looked at at him, him, he he leered leered at at the the leaders leaders with with the the eye eye with with which which he he didn't didn't squint, squint, in in a a very very knowing knowing manner. manner. 'ain't 'ain't you?' asked asked william. william. 'ain't 'ain't i i what?' what?' said said the the gentleman gentleman behind. behind. 'bred 'bred them them suffolk suffolk punches punches by by wholesale?' wholesale?' 'i 'i should should think think so,' so,' said said the the gentleman. gentleman. 'there 'there ain't ain't no no sort sort of of orse orse that that i i ain't ain't bred, bred, and and no no sort sort of of dorg. dorg. orses orses and and dorgs dorgs is is some some men's men's fancy. fancy. they're they're wittles wittles and and drink drink to to me me -- -- lodging, lodging, wife, wife, and and children children -- -- reading, reading, writing, writing, and and arithmetic arithmetic -- -- snuff, snuff, tobacker, tobacker, and and sleep.' sleep.' 'that 'that ain't ain't a a sort sort of of man man to to see see sitting sitting behind behind a a coach-box, coach-box, is is it it though?' though?' said said william william in in my my ear, ear, as as he he handled handled the the reins. reins. i i construed construed this this remark remark into into an an indication indication of of a a wish wish that that he he should should have have my my place, place, so so i i blushingly blushingly offered offered to to resign resign it. it. 'well, 'well, if if you don't don't mind, mind, sir,' sir,' said said william, william, 'i 'i think think it it would would be be more more correct.' correct.' i i have have always always considered considered this this as as the the first first fall fall i i had had in in life. life. when when i i booked booked my my place place at at the the coach coach office office i i had had had had 'box 'box seat' seat' written written against against the the entry, entry, and and had had given given the the book-keeper book-keeper half-a-crown. half-a-crown. i i was was got got up up in in a a special special great-coat great-coat and and shawl, shawl, expressly expressly to to do do honour honour to to that that distinguished distinguished eminence; eminence; had had glorified glorified myself myself upon upon it it a a good good deal; deal; and and had had felt felt that that i i was was a a credit credit to to the the coach. coach. and and here, here, in in the the very very first first stage, stage, i i was was supplanted supplanted by by a a shabby shabby man man with with a a squint, squint, who who had had no no other other merit merit than than smelling smelling like like a a livery-stables, livery-stables, and and being being able able to to walk walk across across me, me, more more like like a a fly fly than than a a human human being, being, while while the the horses horses were were at at a a canter! canter! a a distrust distrust of of myself, myself, which which has has often often beset beset me me in in life life on on small small occasions, occasions, when when it it would would have have been been better better away, away, was was assuredly assuredly not not stopped stopped in in its its growth growth by by this this little little incident incident outside outside the the canterbury canterbury coach. coach. it it was was in in vain vain to to take take refuge refuge in in gruffness gruffness of of speech. speech. i i spoke spoke from from the the pit pit of of my my stomach stomach for for the the rest rest of of the the journey, journey, but but i i felt felt completely completely extinguished, extinguished, and and dreadfully dreadfully young. young. it it was was curious curious and and interesting, interesting, nevertheless, nevertheless, to to be be sitting sitting up up there there behind behind four four horses: horses: well well educated, educated, well well dressed, dressed, and and with with plenty plenty of of money money in in my my pocket; pocket; and and to to look look out out for for the the places places where where i i had had slept slept on on my my weary weary journey. journey. i i had had abundant abundant occupation occupation for for my my thoughts, thoughts, in in every every conspicuous conspicuous landmark landmark on on the the road. road. when when i i looked looked down down at at the the trampers trampers whom whom we we passed, passed, and and saw saw that that well-remembered well-remembered style style of of face face turned turned up, up, i i felt felt as as if if the the tinker's tinker's blackened blackened hand hand were were in in the the bosom bosom of of my my shirt shirt again. again. when when we we clattered clattered through through the the narrow narrow street street of of chatham, chatham, and and i i caught caught a a glimpse, glimpse, in in passing, passing, of of the the lane lane where where the the old old monster monster lived lived who who had had bought bought my my jacket, jacket, i i stretched stretched my my neck neck eagerly eagerly to to look look for for the the place place where where i i had had sat, sat, in in the the sun sun and and in in the the shade, shade, waiting waiting for for my my money. money. when when we we came, came, at at last, last, within within a a stage stage of of london, london, and and passed passed the the veritable veritable salem salem house house where where mr. mr. creakle creakle had had laid laid about about him him with with a a heavy heavy hand, hand, i i would would have have given given all all i i had, had, for for lawful lawful permission permission to to get get down down and and thrash thrash him, him, and and let let all all the the boys boys out out like like so so many many caged caged sparrows. sparrows. we we went went to to the the golden golden cross cross at at charing charing cross, cross, then then a a mouldy mouldy sort sort of of establishment establishment in in a a close close neighbourhood. neighbourhood. a a waiter waiter showed showed me me into into the the coffee-room; coffee-room; and and a a chambermaid chambermaid introduced introduced me me to to my my small small bedchamber, bedchamber, which which smelt smelt like like a a hackney-coach, hackney-coach, and and was was shut shut up up like like a a family family vault. vault. i i was was still still painfully painfully conscious conscious of of my my youth, youth, for for nobody nobody stood stood in in any any awe awe of of me me at at all: all: the the chambermaid chambermaid being being utterly utterly indifferent indifferent to to my my opinions opinions on on any any subject, subject, and and the the waiter waiter being being familiar familiar with with me, me, and and offering offering advice advice to to my my inexperience. inexperience. 'well 'well now,' now,' said said the the waiter, waiter, in in a a tone tone of of confidence, confidence, 'what 'what would would you like like for for dinner? dinner? young young gentlemen gentlemen likes likes poultry poultry in in general: general: have have a a fowl!' fowl!' i i told told him, him, as as majestically majestically as as i i could, could, that that i i wasn't wasn't in in the the humour humour for for a a fowl. fowl. 'ain't 'ain't you?' said said the the waiter. waiter. 'young 'young gentlemen gentlemen is is generally generally tired tired of of beef beef and and mutton: mutton: have have a a weal weal cutlet!' cutlet!' i i assented assented to to this this proposal, proposal, in in default default of of being being able able to to suggest suggest anything anything else. else. 'do 'do you care care for for taters?' taters?' said said the the waiter, waiter, with with an an insinuating insinuating smile, smile, and and his his head head on on one one side. side. 'young 'young gentlemen gentlemen generally generally has has been been overdosed overdosed with with taters.' taters.' i i commanded commanded him, him, in in my my deepest deepest voice, voice, to to order order a a veal veal cutlet cutlet and and potatoes, potatoes, and and all all things things fitting; fitting; and and to to inquire inquire at at the the bar bar if if there there were were any any letters letters for for trotwood trotwood copperfield, copperfield, esquire esquire -- -- which which i i knew knew there there were were not, not, and and couldn't couldn't be, be, but but thought thought it it manly manly to to appear appear to to expect. expect. he he soon soon came came back back to to say say that that there there were were none none (at (at which which i i was was much much surprised) surprised) and and began began to to lay lay the the cloth cloth for for my my dinner dinner in in a a box box by by the the fire. fire. while while he he was was so so engaged, engaged, he he asked asked me me what what i i would would take take with with it; it; and and on on my my replying replying 'half 'half a a pint pint of of sherry,'thought sherry,'thought it it a a favourable favourable opportunity, opportunity, i i am am afraid, afraid, to to extract extract that that measure measure of of wine wine from from the the stale stale leavings leavings at at the the bottoms bottoms of of several several small small decanters. decanters. i i am am of of this this opinion, opinion, because, because, while while i i was was reading reading the the newspaper, newspaper, i i observed observed him him behind behind a a low low wooden wooden partition, partition, which which was was his his private private apartment, apartment, very very busy busy pouring pouring out out of of a a number number of of those those vessels vessels into into one, one, like like a a chemist chemist and and druggist druggist making making up up a a prescription. prescription. when when the the wine wine came, came, too, too, i i thought thought it it flat; flat; and and it it certainly certainly had had more more english english crumbs crumbs in in it, it, than than were were to to be be expected expected in in a a foreign foreign wine wine in in anything anything like like a a pure pure state, state, but but i i was was bashful bashful enough enough to to drink drink it, it, and and say say nothing. nothing. being being then then in in a a pleasant pleasant frame frame of of mind mind (from (from which which i i infer infer that that poisoning poisoning is is not not always always disagreeable disagreeable in in some some stages stages of of the the process), process), i i resolved resolved to to go go to to the the play. play. it it was was covent covent garden garden theatre theatre that that i i chose; chose; and and there, there, from from the the back back of of a a centre centre box, box, i i saw saw julius julius caesar caesar and and the the new new pantomime. pantomime. to to have have all all those those noble noble romans romans alive alive before before me, me, and and walking walking in in and and out out for for my my entertainment, entertainment, instead instead of of being being the the stern stern taskmasters taskmasters they they had had been been at at school, school, was was a a most most novel novel and and delightful delightful effect. effect. but but the the mingled mingled reality reality and and mystery mystery of of the the whole whole show, show, the the influence influence upon upon me me of of the the poetry, poetry, the the lights, lights, the the music, music, the the company, company, the the smooth smooth stupendous stupendous changes changes of of glittering glittering and and brilliant brilliant scenery, scenery, were were so so dazzling, dazzling, and and opened opened up up such such illimitable illimitable regions regions of of delight, delight, that that when when i i came came out out into into the the rainy rainy street, street, at at twelve twelve o'clock o'clock at at night, night, i i felt felt as as if if i i had had come come from from the the clouds, clouds, where where i i had had been been leading leading a a romantic romantic life life for for ages, ages, to to a a bawling, bawling, splashing, splashing, link-lighted, link-lighted, umbrella-struggling, umbrella-struggling, hackney-coach-jostling, hackney-coach-jostling, patten-clinking, patten-clinking, muddy, muddy, miserable miserable world. world. i i had had emerged emerged by by another another door, door, and and stood stood in in the the street street for for a a little little while, while, as as if if i i really really were were a a stranger stranger upon upon earth: earth: but but the the unceremonious unceremonious pushing pushing and and hustling hustling that that i i received, received, soon soon recalled recalled me me to to myself, myself, and and put put me me in in the the road road back back to to the the hotel; hotel; whither whither i i went, went, revolving revolving the the glorious glorious vision vision all all the the way; way; and and where, where, after after some some porter porter and and oysters, oysters, i i sat sat revolving revolving it it still, still, at at past past one one o'clock, o'clock, with with my my eyes eyes on on the the coffee-room coffee-room fire. fire. i i was was so so filled filled with with the the play, play, and and with with the the past past -- -- for for it it was, was, in in a a manner, manner, like like a a shining shining transparency, transparency, through through which which i i saw saw my my earlier earlier life life moving moving along along -- -- that that i i don't don't know know when when the the figure figure of of a a handsome handsome well-formed well-formed young young man man dressed dressed with with a a tasteful tasteful easy easy negligence negligence which which i i have have reason reason to to remember remember very very well, well, became became a a real real presence presence to to me. me. but but i i recollect recollect being being conscious conscious of of his his company company without without having having noticed noticed his his coming coming in in -- -- and and my my still still sitting, sitting, musing, musing, over over the the coffee-room coffee-room fire. fire. at at last last i i rose rose to to go go to to bed, bed, much much to to the the relief relief of of the the sleepy sleepy waiter, waiter, who who had had got got the the fidgets fidgets in in his his legs, legs, and and was was twisting twisting them, them, and and hitting hitting them, them, and and putting putting them them through through all all kinds kinds of of contortions contortions in in his his small small pantry. pantry. in in going going towards towards the the door, door, i i passed passed the the person person who who had had come come in, in, and and saw saw him him plainly. plainly. i i turned turned directly, directly, came came back, back, and and looked looked again. again. he he did did not not know know me, me, but but i i knew knew him him in in a a moment. moment. at at another another time time i i might might have have wanted wanted the the confidence confidence or or the the decision decision to to speak speak to to him, him, and and might might have have put put it it off off until until next next day, day, and and might might have have lost lost him. him. but, but, in in the the then then condition condition of of my my mind, mind, where where the the play play was was still still running running high, high, his his former former protection protection of of me me appeared appeared so so deserving deserving of of my my gratitude, gratitude, and and my my old old love love for for him him overflowed overflowed my my breast breast so so freshly freshly and and spontaneously, spontaneously, that that i i went went up up to to him him at at once, once, with with a a fast-beating fast-beating heart, heart, and and said: said: 'steerforth! 'steerforth! won't won't you speak speak to to me?' me?' he he looked looked at at me me -- -- just just as as he he used used to to look, look, sometimes sometimes -- -- but but i i saw saw no no recognition recognition in in his his face. face. 'you don't don't remember remember me, me, i i am am afraid,' afraid,' said said i. i. 'my 'my god!' god!' he he suddenly suddenly exclaimed. exclaimed. 'it's 'it's little little copperfield!' copperfield!' i i grasped grasped him him by by both both hands, hands, and and could could not not let let them them go. go. but but for for very very shame, shame, and and the the fear fear that that it it might might displease displease him, him, i i could could have have held held him him round round the the neck neck and and cried. cried. 'i 'i never, never, never, never, never never was was so so glad! glad! my my dear dear steerforth, steerforth, i i am am so so overjoyed overjoyed to to see see you!' 'and 'and i i am am rejoiced rejoiced to to see see you, too!' too!' he he said, said, shaking shaking my my hands hands heartily. heartily. 'why, 'why, copperfield, copperfield, old old boy, boy, don't don't be be overpowered!' overpowered!' and and yet yet he he was was glad, glad, too, too, i i thought, thought, to to see see how how the the delight delight i i had had in in meeting meeting him him affected affected me. me. i i brushed brushed away away the the tears tears that that my my utmost utmost resolution resolution had had not not been been able able to to keep keep back, back, and and i i made made a a clumsy clumsy laugh laugh of of it, it, and and we we sat sat down down together, together, side side by by side. side. 'why, 'why, how how do do you come come to to be be here?' here?' said said steerforth, steerforth, clapping clapping me me on on the the shoulder. shoulder. 'i 'i came came here here by by the the canterbury canterbury coach, coach, today. today. i i have have been been adopted adopted by by an an aunt aunt down down in in that that part part of of the the country, country, and and have have just just finished finished my my education education there. there. how how do do you come come to to be be here, here, steerforth?' steerforth?' 'well, 'well, i i am am what what they they call call an an oxford oxford man,' man,' he he returned; returned; 'that 'that is is to to say, say, i i get get bored bored to to death death down down there, there, periodically periodically -- -- and and i i am am on on my my way way now now to to my my mother's. mother's. you're you're a a devilish devilish amiable-looking amiable-looking fellow, fellow, copperfield. copperfield. just just what what you used used to to be, be, now now i i look look at at you! not not altered altered in in the the least!' least!' 'i 'i knew knew you immediately,' immediately,' i i said; said; 'but 'but you are are more more easily easily remembered.' remembered.' he he laughed laughed as as he he ran ran his his hand hand through through the the clustering clustering curls curls of of his his hair, hair, and and said said gaily: gaily: 'yes, 'yes, i i am am on on an an expedition expedition of of duty. duty. my my mother mother lives lives a a little little way way out out of of town; town; and and the the roads roads being being in in a a beastly beastly condition, condition, and and our our house house tedious tedious enough, enough, i i remained remained here here tonight tonight instead instead of of going going on. on. i i have have not not been been in in town town half-a-dozen half-a-dozen hours, hours, and and those those i i have have been been dozing dozing and and grumbling grumbling away away at at the the play.' play.' 'i 'i have have been been at at the the play, play, too,' too,' said said i. i. 'at 'at covent covent garden. garden. what what a a delightful delightful and and magnificent magnificent entertainment, entertainment, steerforth!' steerforth!' steerforth steerforth laughed laughed heartily. heartily. 'my 'my dear dear young young davy,' davy,' he he said, said, clapping clapping me me on on the the shoulder shoulder again, again, 'you are are a a very very daisy. daisy. the the daisy daisy of of the the field, field, at at sunrise, sunrise, is is not not fresher fresher than than you are. are. i i have have been been at at covent covent garden, garden, too, too, and and there there never never was was a a more more miserable miserable business. business. holloa, holloa, you sir!' sir!' this this was was addressed addressed to to the the waiter, waiter, who who had had been been very very attentive attentive to to our our recognition, recognition, at at a a distance, distance, and and now now came came forward forward deferentially. deferentially. 'where 'where have have you put put my my friend, friend, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'beg 'beg your your pardon, pardon, sir?' sir?' 'where 'where does does he he sleep? sleep? what's what's his his number? number? you know know what what i i mean,' mean,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' said said the the waiter, waiter, with with an an apologetic apologetic air. air. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield copperfield is is at at present present in in forty-four, forty-four, sir.' sir.' 'and 'and what what the the devil devil do do you mean,' mean,' retorted retorted steerforth, steerforth, 'by 'by putting putting mr. mr. copperfield copperfield into into a a little little loft loft over over a a stable?' stable?' 'why, 'why, you see see we we wasn't wasn't aware, aware, sir,' sir,' returned returned the the waiter, waiter, still still apologetically, apologetically, 'as 'as mr. mr. copperfield copperfield was was anyways anyways particular. particular. we we can can give give mr. mr. copperfield copperfield seventy-two, seventy-two, sir, sir, if if it it would would be be preferred. preferred. next next you, sir.' sir.' 'of 'of course course it it would would be be preferred,' preferred,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'and 'and do do it it at at once.' once.' the the waiter waiter immediately immediately withdrew withdrew to to make make the the exchange. exchange. steerforth, steerforth, very very much much amused amused at at my my having having been been put put into into forty-four, forty-four, laughed laughed again, again, and and clapped clapped me me on on the the shoulder shoulder again, again, and and invited invited me me to to breakfast breakfast with with him him next next morning morning at at ten ten o'clock o'clock -- -- an an invitation invitation i i was was only only too too proud proud and and happy happy to to accept. accept. it it being being now now pretty pretty late, late, we we took took our our candles candles and and went went upstairs, upstairs, where where we we parted parted with with friendly friendly heartiness heartiness at at his his door, door, and and where where i i found found my my new new room room a a great great improvement improvement on on my my old old one, one, it it not not being being at at all all musty, musty, and and having having an an immense immense four-post four-post bedstead bedstead in in it, it, which which was was quite quite a a little little landed landed estate. estate. here, here, among among pillows pillows enough enough for for six, six, i i soon soon fell fell asleep asleep in in a a blissful blissful condition, condition, and and dreamed dreamed of of ancient ancient rome, rome, steerforth, steerforth, and and friendship, friendship, until until the the early early morning morning coaches, coaches, rumbling rumbling out out of of the the archway archway underneath, underneath, made made me me dream dream of of thunder thunder and and the the gods. gods. chapter chapter 20. 20. steerforth's steerforth's home home when when the the chambermaid chambermaid tapped tapped at at my my door door at at eight eight o'clock, o'clock, and and informed informed me me that that my my shaving-water shaving-water was was outside, outside, i i felt felt severely severely the the having having no no occasion occasion for for it, it, and and blushed blushed in in my my bed. bed. the the suspicion suspicion that that she she laughed laughed too, too, when when she she said said it, it, preyed preyed upon upon my my mind mind all all the the time time i i was was dressing; dressing; and and gave gave me, me, i i was was conscious, conscious, a a sneaking sneaking and and guilty guilty air air when when i i passed passed her her on on the the staircase, staircase, as as i i was was going going down down to to breakfast. breakfast. i i was was so so sensitively sensitively aware, aware, indeed, indeed, of of being being younger younger than than i i could could have have wished, wished, that that for for some some time time i i could could not not make make up up my my mind mind to to pass pass her her at at all, all, under under the the ignoble ignoble circumstances circumstances of of the the case; case; but, but, hearing hearing her her there there with with a a broom, broom, stood stood peeping peeping out out of of window window at at king king charles charles on on horseback, horseback, surrounded surrounded by by a a maze maze of of hackney-coaches, hackney-coaches, and and looking looking anything anything but but regal regal in in a a drizzling drizzling rain rain and and a a dark-brown dark-brown fog, fog, until until i i was was admonished admonished by by the the waiter waiter that that the the gentleman gentleman was was waiting waiting for for me. me. it it was was not not in in the the coffee-room coffee-room that that i i found found steerforth steerforth expecting expecting me, me, but but in in a a snug snug private private apartment, apartment, red-curtained red-curtained and and turkey-carpeted, turkey-carpeted, where where the the fire fire burnt burnt bright, bright, and and a a fine fine hot hot breakfast breakfast was was set set forth forth on on a a table table covered covered with with a a clean clean cloth; cloth; and and a a cheerful cheerful miniature miniature of of the the room, room, the the fire, fire, the the breakfast, breakfast, steerforth, steerforth, and and all, all, was was shining shining in in the the little little round round mirror mirror over over the the sideboard. sideboard. i i was was rather rather bashful bashful at at first, first, steerforth steerforth being being so so self-possessed, self-possessed, and and elegant, elegant, and and superior superior to to me me in in all all respects respects (age (age included); included); but but his his easy easy patronage patronage soon soon put put that that to to rights, rights, and and made made me me quite quite at at home. home. i i could could not not enough enough admire admire the the change change he he had had wrought wrought in in the the golden golden cross; cross; or or compare compare the the dull dull forlorn forlorn state state i i had had held held yesterday, yesterday, with with this this morning's morning's comfort comfort and and this this morning's morning's entertainment. entertainment. as as to to the the waiter's waiter's familiarity, familiarity, it it was was quenched quenched as as if if it it had had never never been. been. he he attended attended on on us, us, as as i i may may say, say, in in sackcloth sackcloth and and ashes. ashes. 'now, 'now, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said steerforth, steerforth, when when we we were were alone, alone, 'i 'i should should like like to to hear hear what what you are are doing, doing, and and where where you are are going, going, and and all all about about you. i i feel feel as as if if you were were my my property.' property.' glowing glowing with with pleasure pleasure to to find find that that he he had had still still this this interest interest in in me, me, i i told told him him how how my my aunt aunt had had proposed proposed the the little little expedition expedition that that i i had had before before me, me, and and whither whither it it tended. tended. 'as 'as you are are in in no no hurry, hurry, then,' then,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'come 'come home home with with me me to to highgate, highgate, and and stay stay a a day day or or two. two. you will will be be pleased pleased with with my my mother mother -- -- she she is is a a little little vain vain and and prosy prosy about about me, me, but but that that you can can forgive forgive her her -- -- and and she she will will be be pleased pleased with with you.' 'i 'i should should like like to to be be as as sure sure of of that, that, as as you are are kind kind enough enough to to say say you are,' are,' i i answered, answered, smiling. smiling. 'oh!' 'oh!' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'everyone 'everyone who who likes likes me, me, has has a a claim claim on on her her that that is is sure sure to to be be acknowledged.' acknowledged.' 'then 'then i i think think i i shall shall be be a a favourite,' favourite,' said said i. i. 'good!' 'good!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'come 'come and and prove prove it. it. we we will will go go and and see see the the lions lions for for an an hour hour or or two two -- -- it's it's something something to to have have a a fresh fresh fellow fellow like like you to to show show them them to, to, copperfield copperfield -- -- and and then then we'll we'll journey journey out out to to highgate highgate by by the the coach.' coach.' i i could could hardly hardly believe believe but but that that i i was was in in a a dream, dream, and and that that i i should should wake wake presently presently in in number number forty-four, forty-four, to to the the solitary solitary box box in in the the coffee-room coffee-room and and the the familiar familiar waiter waiter again. again. after after i i had had written written to to my my aunt aunt and and told told her her of of my my fortunate fortunate meeting meeting with with my my admired admired old old schoolfellow, schoolfellow, and and my my acceptance acceptance of of his his invitation, invitation, we we went went out out in in a a hackney-chariot, hackney-chariot, and and saw saw a a panorama panorama and and some some other other sights, sights, and and took took a a walk walk through through the the museum, museum, where where i i could could not not help help observing observing how how much much steerforth steerforth knew, knew, on on an an infinite infinite variety variety of of subjects, subjects, and and of of how how little little account account he he seemed seemed to to make make his his knowledge. knowledge. 'you'll 'you'll take take a a high high degree degree at at college, college, steerforth,' steerforth,' said said i, i, 'if 'if you have have not not done done so so already; already; and and they they will will have have good good reason reason to to be be proud proud of of you.' 'i 'i take take a a degree!' degree!' cried cried steerforth. steerforth. 'not 'not i! i! my my dear dear daisy daisy -- -- will will you mind mind my my calling calling you daisy?' daisy?' 'not 'not at at all!' all!' said said i. i. 'that's 'that's a a good good fellow! fellow! my my dear dear daisy,' daisy,' said said steerforth, steerforth, laughing. laughing. 'i 'i have have not not the the least least desire desire or or intention intention to to distinguish distinguish myself myself in in that that way. way. i i have have done done quite quite sufficient sufficient for for my my purpose. purpose. i i find find that that i i am am heavy heavy company company enough enough for for myself myself as as i i am.' am.' 'but 'but the the fame fame -- -- ' ' i i was was beginning. beginning. 'you romantic romantic daisy!' daisy!' said said steerforth, steerforth, laughing laughing still still more more heartily: heartily: 'why 'why should should i i trouble trouble myself, myself, that that a a parcel parcel of of heavy-headed heavy-headed fellows fellows may may gape gape and and hold hold up up their their hands? hands? let let them them do do it it at at some some other other man. man. there's there's fame fame for for him, him, and and he's he's welcome welcome to to it.' it.' i i was was abashed abashed at at having having made made so so great great a a mistake, mistake, and and was was glad glad to to change change the the subject. subject. fortunately fortunately it it was was not not difficult difficult to to do, do, for for steerforth steerforth could could always always pass pass from from one one subject subject to to another another with with a a carelessness carelessness and and lightness lightness that that were were his his own. own. lunch lunch succeeded succeeded to to our our sight-seeing, sight-seeing, and and the the short short winter winter day day wore wore away away so so fast, fast, that that it it was was dusk dusk when when the the stage-coach stage-coach stopped stopped with with us us at at an an old old brick brick house house at at highgate highgate on on the the summit summit of of the the hill. hill. an an elderly elderly lady, lady, though though not not very very far far advanced advanced in in years, years, with with a a proud proud carriage carriage and and a a handsome handsome face, face, was was in in the the doorway doorway as as we we alighted; alighted; and and greeting greeting steerforth steerforth as as 'my 'my dearest dearest james,' james,' folded folded him him in in her her arms. arms. to to this this lady lady he he presented presented me me as as his his mother, mother, and and she she gave gave me me a a stately stately welcome. welcome. it it was was a a genteel genteel old-fashioned old-fashioned house, house, very very quiet quiet and and orderly. orderly. from from the the windows windows of of my my room room i i saw saw all all london london lying lying in in the the distance distance like like a a great great vapour, vapour, with with here here and and there there some some lights lights twinkling twinkling through through it. it. i i had had only only time, time, in in dressing, dressing, to to glance glance at at the the solid solid furniture, furniture, the the framed framed pieces pieces of of work work (done, (done, i i supposed, supposed, by by steerforth's steerforth's mother mother when when she she was was a a girl), girl), and and some some pictures pictures in in crayons crayons of of ladies ladies with with powdered powdered hair hair and and bodices, bodices, coming coming and and going going on on the the walls, walls, as as the the newly-kindled newly-kindled fire fire crackled crackled and and sputtered, sputtered, when when i i was was called called to to dinner. dinner. there there was was a a second second lady lady in in the the dining-room, dining-room, of of a a slight slight short short figure, figure, dark, dark, and and not not agreeable agreeable to to look look at, at, but but with with some some appearance appearance of of good good looks looks too, too, who who attracted attracted my my attention: attention: perhaps perhaps because because i i had had not not expected expected to to see see her; her; perhaps perhaps because because i i found found myself myself sitting sitting opposite opposite to to her; her; perhaps perhaps because because of of something something really really remarkable remarkable in in her. her. she she had had black black hair hair and and eager eager black black eyes, eyes, and and was was thin, thin, and and had had a a scar scar upon upon her her lip. lip. it it was was an an old old scar scar -- -- i i should should rather rather call call it it seam, seam, for for it it was was not not discoloured, discoloured, and and had had healed healed years years ago ago -- -- which which had had once once cut cut through through her her mouth, mouth, downward downward towards towards the the chin, chin, but but was was now now barely barely visible visible across across the the table, table, except except above above and and on on her her upper upper lip, lip, the the shape shape of of which which it it had had altered. altered. i i concluded concluded in in my my own own mind mind that that she she was was about about thirty thirty years years of of age, age, and and that that she she wished wished to to be be married. married. she she was was a a little little dilapidated dilapidated -- -- like like a a house house -- -- with with having having been been so so long long to to let; let; yet yet had, had, as as i i have have said, said, an an appearance appearance of of good good looks. looks. her her thinness thinness seemed seemed to to be be the the effect effect of of some some wasting wasting fire fire within within her, her, which which found found a a vent vent in in her her gaunt gaunt eyes. eyes. she she was was introduced introduced as as miss miss dartle, dartle, and and both both steerforth steerforth and and his his mother mother called called her her rosa. rosa. i i found found that that she she lived lived there, there, and and had had been been for for a a long long time time mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's companion. companion. it it appeared appeared to to me me that that she she never never said said anything anything she she wanted wanted to to say, say, outright; outright; but but hinted hinted it, it, and and made made a a great great deal deal more more of of it it by by this this practice. practice. for for example, example, when when mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth observed, observed, more more in in jest jest than than earnest, earnest, that that she she feared feared her her son son led led but but a a wild wild life life at at college, college, miss miss dartle dartle put put in in thus: thus: 'oh, 'oh, really? really? you know know how how ignorant ignorant i i am, am, and and that that i i only only ask ask for for information, information, but but isn't isn't it it always always so? so? i i thought thought that that kind kind of of life life was was on on all all hands hands understood understood to to be be -- -- eh?' eh?' 'it 'it is is education education for for a a very very grave grave profession, profession, if if you mean mean that, that, rosa,' rosa,' mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth answered answered with with some some coldness. coldness. 'oh! 'oh! yes! yes! that's that's very very true,' true,' returned returned miss miss dartle. dartle. 'but 'but isn't isn't it, it, though? though? -- -- i i want want to to be be put put right, right, if if i i am am wrong wrong -- -- isn't isn't it, it, really?' really?' 'really 'really what?' what?' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. 'oh! 'oh! you mean mean it's it's not!' not!' returned returned miss miss dartle. dartle. 'well, 'well, i'm i'm very very glad glad to to hear hear it! it! now, now, i i know know what what to to do! do! that's that's the the advantage advantage of of asking. asking. i i shall shall never never allow allow people people to to talk talk before before me me about about wastefulness wastefulness and and profligacy, profligacy, and and so so forth, forth, in in connexion connexion with with that that life, life, any any more.' more.' 'and 'and you will will be be right,' right,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. 'my 'my son's son's tutor tutor is is a a conscientious conscientious gentleman; gentleman; and and if if i i had had not not implicit implicit reliance reliance on on my my son, son, i i should should have have reliance reliance on on him.' him.' 'should 'should you?' said said miss miss dartle. dartle. 'dear 'dear me! me! conscientious, conscientious, is is he? he? really really conscientious, conscientious, now?' now?' 'yes, 'yes, i i am am convinced convinced of of it,' it,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. 'how 'how very very nice!' nice!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss dartle. dartle. 'what 'what a a comfort! comfort! really really conscientious? conscientious? then then he's he's not not -- -- but but of of course course he he can't can't be, be, if if he's he's really really conscientious. conscientious. well, well, i i shall shall be be quite quite happy happy in in my my opinion opinion of of him, him, from from this this time. time. you can't can't think think how how it it elevates elevates him him in in my my opinion, opinion, to to know know for for certain certain that that he's he's really really conscientious!' conscientious!' her her own own views views of of every every question, question, and and her her correction correction of of everything everything that that was was said said to to which which she she was was opposed, opposed, miss miss dartle dartle insinuated insinuated in in the the same same way: way: sometimes, sometimes, i i could could not not conceal conceal from from myself, myself, with with great great power, power, though though in in contradiction contradiction even even of of steerforth. steerforth. an an instance instance happened happened before before dinner dinner was was done. done. mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth speaking speaking to to me me about about my my intention intention of of going going down down into into suffolk, suffolk, i i said said at at hazard hazard how how glad glad i i should should be, be, if if steerforth steerforth would would only only go go there there with with me; me; and and explaining explaining to to him him that that i i was was going going to to see see my my old old nurse, nurse, and and mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's family, family, i i reminded reminded him him of of the the boatman boatman whom whom he he had had seen seen at at school. school. 'oh! 'oh! that that bluff bluff fellow!' fellow!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'he 'he had had a a son son with with him, him, hadn't hadn't he?' he?' 'no. 'no. that that was was his his nephew,' nephew,' i i replied; replied; 'whom 'whom he he adopted, adopted, though, though, as as a a son. son. he he has has a a very very pretty pretty little little niece niece too, too, whom whom he he adopted adopted as as a a daughter. daughter. in in short, short, his his house house -- -- or or rather rather his his boat, boat, for for he he lives lives in in one, one, on on dry dry land land -- -- is is full full of of people people who who are are objects objects of of his his generosity generosity and and kindness. kindness. you would would be be delighted delighted to to see see that that household.' household.' 'should 'should i?' i?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'well, 'well, i i think think i i should. should. i i must must see see what what can can be be done. done. it it would would be be worth worth a a journey journey (not (not to to mention mention the the pleasure pleasure of of a a journey journey with with you, daisy), daisy), to to see see that that sort sort of of people people together, together, and and to to make make one one of of 'em.' 'em.' my my heart heart leaped leaped with with a a new new hope hope of of pleasure. pleasure. but but it it was was in in reference reference to to the the tone tone in in which which he he had had spoken spoken of of 'that 'that sort sort of of people', people', that that miss miss dartle, dartle, whose whose sparkling sparkling eyes eyes had had been been watchful watchful of of us, us, now now broke broke in in again. again. 'oh, 'oh, but, but, really? really? do do tell tell me. me. are are they, they, though?' though?' she she said. said. 'are 'are they they what? what? and and are are who who what?' what?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'that 'that sort sort of of people. people. -- -- -are -are they they really really animals animals and and clods, clods, and and beings beings of of another another order? order? i i want want to to know know so so much.' much.' 'why, 'why, there's there's a a pretty pretty wide wide separation separation between between them them and and us,' us,' said said steerforth, steerforth, with with indifference. indifference. 'they 'they are are not not to to be be expected expected to to be be as as sensitive sensitive as as we we are. are. their their delicacy delicacy is is not not to to be be shocked, shocked, or or hurt hurt easily. easily. they they are are wonderfully wonderfully virtuous, virtuous, i i dare dare say say -- -- some some people people contend contend for for that, that, at at least; least; and and i i am am sure sure i i don't don't want want to to contradict contradict them them -- -- but but they they have have not not very very fine fine natures, natures, and and they they may may be be thankful thankful that, that, like like their their coarse coarse rough rough skins, skins, they they are are not not easily easily wounded.' wounded.' 'really!' 'really!' said said miss miss dartle. dartle. 'well, 'well, i i don't don't know, know, now, now, when when i i have have been been better better pleased pleased than than to to hear hear that. that. it's it's so so consoling! consoling! it's it's such such a a delight delight to to know know that, that, when when they they suffer, suffer, they they don't don't feel! feel! sometimes sometimes i i have have been been quite quite uneasy uneasy for for that that sort sort of of people; people; but but now now i i shall shall just just dismiss dismiss the the idea idea of of them, them, altogether. altogether. live live and and learn. learn. i i had had my my doubts, doubts, i i confess, confess, but but now now they're they're cleared cleared up. up. i i didn't didn't know, know, and and now now i i do do know, know, and and that that shows shows the the advantage advantage of of asking asking -- -- don't don't it?' it?' i i believed believed that that steerforth steerforth had had said said what what he he had, had, in in jest, jest, or or to to draw draw miss miss dartle dartle out; out; and and i i expected expected him him to to say say as as much much when when she she was was gone, gone, and and we we two two were were sitting sitting before before the the fire. fire. but but he he merely merely asked asked me me what what i i thought thought of of her. her. 'she 'she is is very very clever, clever, is is she she not?' not?' i i asked. asked. 'clever! 'clever! she she brings brings everything everything to to a a grindstone,' grindstone,' said said steerforth, steerforth, and and sharpens sharpens it, it, as as she she has has sharpened sharpened her her own own face face and and figure figure these these years years past. past. she she has has worn worn herself herself away away by by constant constant sharpening. sharpening. she she is is all all edge.' edge.' 'what 'what a a remarkable remarkable scar scar that that is is upon upon her her lip!' lip!' i i said. said. steerforth's steerforth's face face fell, fell, and and he he paused paused a a moment. moment. 'why, 'why, the the fact fact is,' is,' he he returned, returned, 'i 'i did did that.' that.' 'by 'by an an unfortunate unfortunate accident!' accident!' 'no. 'no. i i was was a a young young boy, boy, and and she she exasperated exasperated me, me, and and i i threw threw a a hammer hammer at at her. her. a a promising promising young young angel angel i i must must have have been!' been!' i i was was deeply deeply sorry sorry to to have have touched touched on on such such a a painful painful theme, theme, but but that that was was useless useless now. now. 'she 'she has has borne borne the the mark mark ever ever since, since, as as you see,' see,' said said steerforth; steerforth; 'and 'and she'll she'll bear bear it it to to her her grave, grave, if if she she ever ever rests rests in in one one -- -- though though i i can can hardly hardly believe believe she she will will ever ever rest rest anywhere. anywhere. she she was was the the motherless motherless child child of of a a sort sort of of cousin cousin of of my my father's. father's. he he died died one one day. day. my my mother, mother, who who was was then then a a widow, widow, brought brought her her here here to to be be company company to to her. her. she she has has a a couple couple of of thousand thousand pounds pounds of of her her own, own, and and saves saves the the interest interest of of it it every every year, year, to to add add to to the the principal. principal. there's there's the the history history of of miss miss rosa rosa dartle dartle for for you.' 'and 'and i i have have no no doubt doubt she she loves loves you like like a a brother?' brother?' said said i. i. 'humph!' 'humph!' retorted retorted steerforth, steerforth, looking looking at at the the fire. fire. 'some 'some brothers brothers are are not not loved loved over over much; much; and and some some love love -- -- but but help help yourself, yourself, copperfield! copperfield! we'll we'll drink drink the the daisies daisies of of the the field, field, in in compliment compliment to to you; and and the the lilies lilies of of the the valley valley that that toil toil not, not, neither neither do do they they spin, spin, in in compliment compliment to to me me -- -- the the more more shame shame for for me!' me!' a a moody moody smile smile that that had had overspread overspread his his features features cleared cleared off off as as he he said said this this merrily, merrily, and and he he was was his his own own frank, frank, winning winning self self again. again. i i could could not not help help glancing glancing at at the the scar scar with with a a painful painful interest interest when when we we went went in in to to tea. tea. it it was was not not long long before before i i observed observed that that it it was was the the most most susceptible susceptible part part of of her her face, face, and and that, that, when when she she turned turned pale, pale, that that mark mark altered altered first, first, and and became became a a dull, dull, lead-coloured lead-coloured streak, streak, lengthening lengthening out out to to its its full full extent, extent, like like a a mark mark in in invisible invisible ink ink brought brought to to the the fire. fire. there there was was a a little little altercation altercation between between her her and and steerforth steerforth about about a a cast cast of of the the dice dice at at back back gammon gammon -- -- when when i i thought thought her, her, for for one one moment, moment, in in a a storm storm of of rage; rage; and and then then i i saw saw it it start start forth forth like like the the old old writing writing on on the the wall. wall. it it was was no no matter matter of of wonder wonder to to me me to to find find mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth devoted devoted to to her her son. son. she she seemed seemed to to be be able able to to speak speak or or think think about about nothing nothing else. else. she she showed showed me me his his picture picture as as an an infant, infant, in in a a locket, locket, with with some some of of his his baby-hair baby-hair in in it; it; she she showed showed me me his his picture picture as as he he had had been been when when i i first first knew knew him; him; and and she she wore wore at at her her breast breast his his picture picture as as he he was was now. now. all all the the letters letters he he had had ever ever written written to to her, her, she she kept kept in in a a cabinet cabinet near near her her own own chair chair by by the the fire; fire; and and she she would would have have read read me me some some of of them, them, and and i i should should have have been been very very glad glad to to hear hear them them too, too, if if he he had had not not interposed, interposed, and and coaxed coaxed her her out out of of the the design. design. 'it 'it was was at at mr. mr. creakle's, creakle's, my my son son tells tells me, me, that that you first first became became acquainted,' acquainted,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, as as she she and and i i were were talking talking at at one one table, table, while while they they played played backgammon backgammon at at another. another. 'indeed, 'indeed, i i recollect recollect his his speaking, speaking, at at that that time, time, of of a a pupil pupil younger younger than than himself himself who who had had taken taken his his fancy fancy there; there; but but your your name, name, as as you may may suppose, suppose, has has not not lived lived in in my my memory.' memory.' 'he 'he was was very very generous generous and and noble noble to to me me in in those those days, days, i i assure assure you, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said i, i, 'and 'and i i stood stood in in need need of of such such a a friend. friend. i i should should have have been been quite quite crushed crushed without without him.' him.' 'he 'he is is always always generous generous and and noble,' noble,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, proudly. proudly. i i subscribed subscribed to to this this with with all all my my heart, heart, god god knows. knows. she she knew knew i i did; did; for for the the stateliness stateliness of of her her manner manner already already abated abated towards towards me, me, except except when when she she spoke spoke in in praise praise of of him, him, and and then then her her air air was was always always lofty. lofty. 'it 'it was was not not a a fit fit school school generally generally for for my my son,' son,' said said she; she; 'far 'far from from it; it; but but there there were were particular particular circumstances circumstances to to be be considered considered at at the the time, time, of of more more importance importance even even than than that that selection. selection. my my son's son's high high spirit spirit made made it it desirable desirable that that he he should should be be placed placed with with some some man man who who felt felt its its superiority, superiority, and and would would be be content content to to bow bow himself himself before before it; it; and and we we found found such such a a man man there.' there.' i i knew knew that, that, knowing knowing the the fellow. fellow. and and yet yet i i did did not not despise despise him him the the more more for for it, it, but but thought thought it it a a redeeming redeeming quality quality in in him him if if he he could could be be allowed allowed any any grace grace for for not not resisting resisting one one so so irresistible irresistible as as steerforth. steerforth. 'my 'my son's son's great great capacity capacity was was tempted tempted on, on, there, there, by by a a feeling feeling of of voluntary voluntary emulation emulation and and conscious conscious pride,' pride,' the the fond fond lady lady went went on on to to say. say. 'he 'he would would have have risen risen against against all all constraint; constraint; but but he he found found himself himself the the monarch monarch of of the the place, place, and and he he haughtily haughtily determined determined to to be be worthy worthy of of his his station. station. it it was was like like himself.' himself.' i i echoed, echoed, with with all all my my heart heart and and soul, soul, that that it it was was like like himself. himself. 'so 'so my my son son took, took, of of his his own own will, will, and and on on no no compulsion, compulsion, to to the the course course in in which which he he can can always, always, when when it it is is his his pleasure, pleasure, outstrip outstrip every every competitor,' competitor,' she she pursued. pursued. 'my 'my son son informs informs me, me, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that you were were quite quite devoted devoted to to him, him, and and that that when when you met met yesterday yesterday you made made yourself yourself known known to to him him with with tears tears of of joy. joy. i i should should be be an an affected affected woman woman if if i i made made any any pretence pretence of of being being surprised surprised by by my my son's son's inspiring inspiring such such emotions; emotions; but but i i cannot cannot be be indifferent indifferent to to anyone anyone who who is is so so sensible sensible of of his his merit, merit, and and i i am am very very glad glad to to see see you here, here, and and can can assure assure you that that he he feels feels an an unusual unusual friendship friendship for for you, and and that that you may may rely rely on on his his protection.' protection.' miss miss dartle dartle played played backgammon backgammon as as eagerly eagerly as as she she did did everything everything else. else. if if i i had had seen seen her, her, first, first, at at the the board, board, i i should should have have fancied fancied that that her her figure figure had had got got thin, thin, and and her her eyes eyes had had got got large, large, over over that that pursuit, pursuit, and and no no other other in in the the world. world. but but i i am am very very much much mistaken mistaken if if she she missed missed a a word word of of this, this, or or lost lost a a look look of of mine mine as as i i received received it it with with the the utmost utmost pleasure, pleasure, and and honoured honoured by by mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's confidence, confidence, felt felt older older than than i i had had done done since since i i left left canterbury. canterbury. when when the the evening evening was was pretty pretty far far spent, spent, and and a a tray tray of of glasses glasses and and decanters decanters came came in, in, steerforth steerforth promised, promised, over over the the fire, fire, that that he he would would seriously seriously think think of of going going down down into into the the country country with with me. me. there there was was no no hurry, hurry, he he said; said; a a week week hence hence would would do; do; and and his his mother mother hospitably hospitably said said the the same. same. while while we we were were talking, talking, he he more more than than once once called called me me daisy; daisy; which which brought brought miss miss dartle dartle out out again. again. 'but 'but really, really, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' she she asked, asked, 'is 'is it it a a nickname? nickname? and and why why does does he he give give it it you? is is it it -- -- eh? eh? -- -- because because he he thinks thinks you young young and and innocent? innocent? i i am am so so stupid stupid in in these these things.' things.' i i coloured coloured in in replying replying that that i i believed believed it it was. was. 'oh!' 'oh!' said said miss miss dartle. dartle. 'now 'now i i am am glad glad to to know know that! that! i i ask ask for for information, information, and and i i am am glad glad to to know know it. it. he he thinks thinks you young young and and innocent; innocent; and and so so you are are his his friend. friend. well, well, that's that's quite quite delightful!' delightful!' she she went went to to bed bed soon soon after after this, this, and and mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth retired retired too. too. steerforth steerforth and and i, i, after after lingering lingering for for half-an-hour half-an-hour over over the the fire, fire, talking talking about about traddles traddles and and all all the the rest rest of of them them at at old old salem salem house, house, went went upstairs upstairs together. together. steerforth's steerforth's room room was was next next to to mine, mine, and and i i went went in in to to look look at at it. it. it it was was a a picture picture of of comfort, comfort, full full of of easy-chairs, easy-chairs, cushions cushions and and footstools, footstools, worked worked by by his his mother's mother's hand, hand, and and with with no no sort sort of of thing thing omitted omitted that that could could help help to to render render it it complete. complete. finally, finally, her her handsome handsome features features looked looked down down on on her her darling darling from from a a portrait portrait on on the the wall, wall, as as if if it it were were even even something something to to her her that that her her likeness likeness should should watch watch him him while while he he slept. slept. i i found found the the fire fire burning burning clear clear enough enough in in my my room room by by this this time, time, and and the the curtains curtains drawn drawn before before the the windows windows and and round round the the bed, bed, giving giving it it a a very very snug snug appearance. appearance. i i sat sat down down in in a a great great chair chair upon upon the the hearth hearth to to meditate meditate on on my my happiness; happiness; and and had had enjoyed enjoyed the the contemplation contemplation of of it it for for some some time, time, when when i i found found a a likeness likeness of of miss miss dartle dartle looking looking eagerly eagerly at at me me from from above above the the chimney-piece. chimney-piece. it it was was a a startling startling likeness, likeness, and and necessarily necessarily had had a a startling startling look. look. the the painter painter hadn't hadn't made made the the scar, scar, but but i i made made it; it; and and there there it it was, was, coming coming and and going; going; now now confined confined to to the the upper upper lip lip as as i i had had seen seen it it at at dinner, dinner, and and now now showing showing the the whole whole extent extent of of the the wound wound inflicted inflicted by by the the hammer, hammer, as as i i had had seen seen it it when when she she was was passionate. passionate. i i wondered wondered peevishly peevishly why why they they couldn't couldn't put put her her anywhere anywhere else else instead instead of of quartering quartering her her on on me. me. to to get get rid rid of of her, her, i i undressed undressed quickly, quickly, extinguished extinguished my my light, light, and and went went to to bed. bed. but, but, as as i i fell fell asleep, asleep, i i could could not not forget forget that that she she was was still still there there looking, looking, 'is 'is it it really, really, though? though? i i want want to to know'; know'; and and when when i i awoke awoke in in the the night, night, i i found found that that i i was was uneasily uneasily asking asking all all sorts sorts of of people people in in my my dreams dreams whether whether it it really really was was or or not not -- -- without without knowing knowing what what i i meant. meant. chapter chapter 21. 21. little little em'ly em'ly there there was was a a servant servant in in that that house, house, a a man man who, who, i i understood, understood, was was usually usually with with steerforth, steerforth, and and had had come come into into his his service service at at the the university, university, who who was was in in appearance appearance a a pattern pattern of of respectability. respectability. i i believe believe there there never never existed existed in in his his station station a a more more respectable-looking respectable-looking man. man. he he was was taciturn, taciturn, soft-footed, soft-footed, very very quiet quiet in in his his manner, manner, deferential, deferential, observant, observant, always always at at hand hand when when wanted, wanted, and and never never near near when when not not wanted; wanted; but but his his great great claim claim to to consideration consideration was was his his respectability. respectability. he he had had not not a a pliant pliant face, face, he he had had rather rather a a stiff stiff neck, neck, rather rather a a tight tight smooth smooth head head with with short short hair hair clinging clinging to to it it at at the the sides, sides, a a soft soft way way of of speaking, speaking, with with a a peculiar peculiar habit habit of of whispering whispering the the letter letter s s so so distinctly, distinctly, that that he he seemed seemed to to use use it it oftener oftener than than any any other other man; man; but but every every peculiarity peculiarity that that he he had had he he made made respectable. respectable. if if his his nose nose had had been been upside-down, upside-down, he he would would have have made made that that respectable. respectable. he he surrounded surrounded himself himself with with an an atmosphere atmosphere of of respectability, respectability, and and walked walked secure secure in in it. it. it it would would have have been been next next to to impossible impossible to to suspect suspect him him of of anything anything wrong, wrong, he he was was so so thoroughly thoroughly respectable. respectable. nobody nobody could could have have thought thought of of putting putting him him in in a a livery, livery, he he was was so so highly highly respectable. respectable. to to have have imposed imposed any any derogatory derogatory work work upon upon him, him, would would have have been been to to inflict inflict a a wanton wanton insult insult on on the the feelings feelings of of a a most most respectable respectable man. man. and and of of this, this, i i noticed noticed -- -- the the women-servants women-servants in in the the household household were were so so intuitively intuitively conscious, conscious, that that they they always always did did such such work work themselves, themselves, and and generally generally while while he he read read the the paper paper by by the the pantry pantry fire. fire. such such a a self-contained self-contained man man i i never never saw. saw. but but in in that that quality, quality, as as in in every every other other he he possessed, possessed, he he only only seemed seemed to to be be the the more more respectable. respectable. even even the the fact fact that that no no one one knew knew his his christian christian name, name, seemed seemed to to form form a a part part of of his his respectability. respectability. nothing nothing could could be be objected objected against against his his surname, surname, littimer, littimer, by by which which he he was was known. known. peter peter might might have have been been hanged, hanged, or or tom tom transported; transported; but but littimer littimer was was perfectly perfectly respectable. respectable. it it was was occasioned, occasioned, i i suppose, suppose, by by the the reverend reverend nature nature of of respectability respectability in in the the abstract, abstract, but but i i felt felt particularly particularly young young in in this this man's man's presence. presence. how how old old he he was was himself, himself, i i could could not not guess guess -- -- and and that that again again went went to to his his credit credit on on the the same same score; score; for for in in the the calmness calmness of of respectability respectability he he might might have have numbered numbered fifty fifty years years as as well well as as thirty. thirty. littimer littimer was was in in my my room room in in the the morning morning before before i i was was up, up, to to bring bring me me that that reproachful reproachful shaving-water, shaving-water, and and to to put put out out my my clothes. clothes. when when i i undrew undrew the the curtains curtains and and looked looked out out of of bed, bed, i i saw saw him, him, in in an an equable equable temperature temperature of of respectability, respectability, unaffected unaffected by by the the east east wind wind of of january, january, and and not not even even breathing breathing frostily, frostily, standing standing my my boots boots right right and and left left in in the the first first dancing dancing position, position, and and blowing blowing specks specks of of dust dust off off my my coat coat as as he he laid laid it it down down like like a a baby. baby. i i gave gave him him good good morning, morning, and and asked asked him him what what o'clock o'clock it it was. was. he he took took out out of of his his pocket pocket the the most most respectable respectable hunting-watch hunting-watch i i ever ever saw, saw, and and preventing preventing the the spring spring with with his his thumb thumb from from opening opening far, far, looked looked in in at at the the face face as as if if he he were were consulting consulting an an oracular oracular oyster, oyster, shut shut it it up up again, again, and and said, said, if if i i pleased, pleased, it it was was half half past past eight. eight. 'mr. 'mr. steerforth steerforth will will be be glad glad to to hear hear how how you have have rested, rested, sir.' sir.' 'thank 'thank you,' said said i, i, 'very 'very well well indeed. indeed. is is mr. mr. steerforth steerforth quite quite well?' well?' 'thank 'thank you, sir, sir, mr. mr. steerforth steerforth is is tolerably tolerably well.' well.' another another of of his his characteristics characteristics -- -- no no use use of of superlatives. superlatives. a a cool cool calm calm medium medium always. always. 'is 'is there there anything anything more more i i can can have have the the honour honour of of doing doing for for you, sir? sir? the the warning-bell warning-bell will will ring ring at at nine; nine; the the family family take take breakfast breakfast at at half half past past nine.' nine.' 'nothing, 'nothing, i i thank thank you.' 'i 'i thank thank you, sir, sir, if if you please'; please'; and and with with that, that, and and with with a a little little inclination inclination of of his his head head when when he he passed passed the the bed-side, bed-side, as as an an apology apology for for correcting correcting me, me, he he went went out, out, shutting shutting the the door door as as delicately delicately as as if if i i had had just just fallen fallen into into a a sweet sweet sleep sleep on on which which my my life life depended. depended. every every morning morning we we held held exactly exactly this this conversation: conversation: never never any any more, more, and and never never any any less: less: and and yet, yet, invariably, invariably, however however far far i i might might have have been been lifted lifted out out of of myself myself over-night, over-night, and and advanced advanced towards towards maturer maturer years, years, by by steerforth's steerforth's companionship, companionship, or or mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's confidence, confidence, or or miss miss dartle's dartle's conversation, conversation, in in the the presence presence of of this this most most respectable respectable man man i i became, became, as as our our smaller smaller poets poets sing, sing, 'a 'a boy boy again'. again'. he he got got horses horses for for us; us; and and steerforth, steerforth, who who knew knew everything, everything, gave gave me me lessons lessons in in riding. riding. he he provided provided foils foils for for us, us, and and steerforth steerforth gave gave me me lessons lessons in in fencing fencing -- -- gloves, gloves, and and i i began, began, of of the the same same master, master, to to improve improve in in boxing. boxing. it it gave gave me me no no manner manner of of concern concern that that steerforth steerforth should should find find me me a a novice novice in in these these sciences, sciences, but but i i never never could could bear bear to to show show my my want want of of skill skill before before the the respectable respectable littimer. littimer. i i had had no no reason reason to to believe believe that that littimer littimer understood understood such such arts arts himself; himself; he he never never led led me me to to suppose suppose anything anything of of the the kind, kind, by by so so much much as as the the vibration vibration of of one one of of his his respectable respectable eyelashes; eyelashes; yet yet whenever whenever he he was was by, by, while while we we were were practising, practising, i i felt felt myself myself the the greenest greenest and and most most inexperienced inexperienced of of mortals. mortals. i i am am particular particular about about this this man, man, because because he he made made a a particular particular effect effect on on me me at at that that time, time, and and because because of of what what took took place place thereafter. thereafter. the the week week passed passed away away in in a a most most delightful delightful manner. manner. it it passed passed rapidly, rapidly, as as may may be be supposed, supposed, to to one one entranced entranced as as i i was; was; and and yet yet it it gave gave me me so so many many occasions occasions for for knowing knowing steerforth steerforth better, better, and and admiring admiring him him more more in in a a thousand thousand respects, respects, that that at at its its close close i i seemed seemed to to have have been been with with him him for for a a much much longer longer time. time. a a dashing dashing way way he he had had of of treating treating me me like like a a plaything, plaything, was was more more agreeable agreeable to to me me than than any any behaviour behaviour he he could could have have adopted. adopted. it it reminded reminded me me of of our our old old acquaintance; acquaintance; it it seemed seemed the the natural natural sequel sequel of of it; it; it it showed showed me me that that he he was was unchanged; unchanged; it it relieved relieved me me of of any any uneasiness uneasiness i i might might have have felt, felt, in in comparing comparing my my merits merits with with his, his, and and measuring measuring my my claims claims upon upon his his friendship friendship by by any any equal equal standard; standard; above above all, all, it it was was a a familiar, familiar, unrestrained, unrestrained, affectionate affectionate demeanour demeanour that that he he used used towards towards no no one one else. else. as as he he had had treated treated me me at at school school differently differently from from all all the the rest, rest, i i joyfully joyfully believed believed that that he he treated treated me me in in life life unlike unlike any any other other friend friend he he had. had. i i believed believed that that i i was was nearer nearer to to his his heart heart than than any any other other friend, friend, and and my my own own heart heart warmed warmed with with attachment attachment to to him. him. he he made made up up his his mind mind to to go go with with me me into into the the country, country, and and the the day day arrived arrived for for our our departure. departure. he he had had been been doubtful doubtful at at first first whether whether to to take take littimer littimer or or not, not, but but decided decided to to leave leave him him at at home. home. the the respectable respectable creature, creature, satisfied satisfied with with his his lot lot whatever whatever it it was, was, arranged arranged our our portmanteaux portmanteaux on on the the little little carriage carriage that that was was to to take take us us into into london, london, as as if if they they were were intended intended to to defy defy the the shocks shocks of of ages, ages, and and received received my my modestly modestly proffered proffered donation donation with with perfect perfect tranquillity. tranquillity. we we bade bade adieu adieu to to mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth and and miss miss dartle, dartle, with with many many thanks thanks on on my my part, part, and and much much kindness kindness on on the the devoted devoted mother's. mother's. the the last last thing thing i i saw saw was was littimer's littimer's unruffled unruffled eye; eye; fraught, fraught, as as i i fancied, fancied, with with the the silent silent conviction conviction that that i i was was very very young young indeed. indeed. what what i i felt, felt, in in returning returning so so auspiciously auspiciously to to the the old old familiar familiar places, places, i i shall shall not not endeavour endeavour to to describe. describe. we we went went down down by by the the mail. mail. i i was was so so concerned, concerned, i i recollect, recollect, even even for for the the honour honour of of yarmouth, yarmouth, that that when when steerforth steerforth said, said, as as we we drove drove through through its its dark dark streets streets to to the the inn, inn, that, that, as as well well as as he he could could make make out, out, it it was was a a good, good, queer, queer, out-of-the-way out-of-the-way kind kind of of hole, hole, i i was was highly highly pleased. pleased. we we went went to to bed bed on on our our arrival arrival (i (i observed observed a a pair pair of of dirty dirty shoes shoes and and gaiters gaiters in in connexion connexion with with my my old old friend friend the the dolphin dolphin as as we we passed passed that that door), door), and and breakfasted breakfasted late late in in the the morning. morning. steerforth, steerforth, who who was was in in great great spirits, spirits, had had been been strolling strolling about about the the beach beach before before i i was was up, up, and and had had made made acquaintance, acquaintance, he he said, said, with with half half the the boatmen boatmen in in the the place. place. moreover, moreover, he he had had seen, seen, in in the the distance, distance, what what he he was was sure sure must must be be the the identical identical house house of of mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with smoke smoke coming coming out out of of the the chimney; chimney; and and had had had had a a great great mind, mind, he he told told me, me, to to walk walk in in and and swear swear he he was was myself myself grown grown out out of of knowledge. knowledge. 'when 'when do do you propose propose to to introduce introduce me me there, there, daisy?' daisy?' he he said. said. 'i 'i am am at at your your disposal. disposal. make make your your own own arrangements.' arrangements.' 'why, 'why, i i was was thinking thinking that that this this evening evening would would be be a a good good time, time, steerforth, steerforth, when when they they are are all all sitting sitting round round the the fire. fire. i i should should like like you to to see see it it when when it's it's snug, snug, it's it's such such a a curious curious place.' place.' 'so 'so be be it!' it!' returned returned steerforth. steerforth. 'this 'this evening.' evening.' 'i 'i shall shall not not give give them them any any notice notice that that we we are are here, here, you know,' know,' said said i, i, delighted. delighted. 'we 'we must must take take them them by by surprise.' surprise.' 'oh, 'oh, of of course! course! it's it's no no fun,' fun,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'unless 'unless we we take take them them by by surprise. surprise. let let us us see see the the natives natives in in their their aboriginal aboriginal condition.' condition.' 'though 'though they they are are that that sort sort of of people people that that you mentioned,' mentioned,' i i returned. returned. 'aha! 'aha! what! what! you recollect recollect my my skirmishes skirmishes with with rosa, rosa, do do you?' he he exclaimed exclaimed with with a a quick quick look. look. 'confound 'confound the the girl, girl, i i am am half half afraid afraid of of her. her. she's she's like like a a goblin goblin to to me. me. but but never never mind mind her. her. now now what what are are you going going to to do? do? you are are going going to to see see your your nurse, nurse, i i suppose?' suppose?' 'why, 'why, yes,' yes,' i i said, said, 'i 'i must must see see peggotty peggotty first first of of all.' all.' 'well,' 'well,' replied replied steerforth, steerforth, looking looking at at his his watch. watch. 'suppose 'suppose i i deliver deliver you up up to to be be cried cried over over for for a a couple couple of of hours. hours. is is that that long long enough?' enough?' i i answered, answered, laughing, laughing, that that i i thought thought we we might might get get through through it it in in that that time, time, but but that that he he must must come come also; also; for for he he would would find find that that his his renown renown had had preceded preceded him, him, and and that that he he was was almost almost as as great great a a personage personage as as i i was. was. 'i'll 'i'll come come anywhere anywhere you like,' like,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'or 'or do do anything anything you like. like. tell tell me me where where to to come come to; to; and and in in two two hours hours i'll i'll produce produce myself myself in in any any state state you please, please, sentimental sentimental or or comical.' comical.' i i gave gave him him minute minute directions directions for for finding finding the the residence residence of of mr. mr. barkis, barkis, carrier carrier to to blunderstone blunderstone and and elsewhere; elsewhere; and, and, on on this this understanding, understanding, went went out out alone. alone. there there was was a a sharp sharp bracing bracing air; air; the the ground ground was was dry; dry; the the sea sea was was crisp crisp and and clear; clear; the the sun sun was was diffusing diffusing abundance abundance of of light, light, if if not not much much warmth; warmth; and and everything everything was was fresh fresh and and lively. lively. i i was was so so fresh fresh and and lively lively myself, myself, in in the the pleasure pleasure of of being being there, there, that that i i could could have have stopped stopped the the people people in in the the streets streets and and shaken shaken hands hands with with them. them. the the streets streets looked looked small, small, of of course. course. the the streets streets that that we we have have only only seen seen as as children children always always do, do, i i believe, believe, when when we we go go back back to to them. them. but but i i had had forgotten forgotten nothing nothing in in them, them, and and found found nothing nothing changed, changed, until until i i came came to to mr. mr. omer's omer's shop. shop. omer omer and and joram joram was was now now written written up, up, where where omer omer used used to to be; be; but but the the inscription, inscription, draper, draper, tailor, tailor, haberdasher, haberdasher, funeral funeral furnisher, furnisher, &c., &c., remained remained as as it it was. was. my my footsteps footsteps seemed seemed to to tend tend so so naturally naturally to to the the shop shop door, door, after after i i had had read read these these words words from from over over the the way, way, that that i i went went across across the the road road and and looked looked in. in. there there was was a a pretty pretty woman woman at at the the back back of of the the shop, shop, dancing dancing a a little little child child in in her her arms, arms, while while another another little little fellow fellow clung clung to to her her apron. apron. i i had had no no difficulty difficulty in in recognizing recognizing either either minnie minnie or or minnie's minnie's children. children. the the glass glass door door of of the the parlour parlour was was not not open; open; but but in in the the workshop workshop across across the the yard yard i i could could faintly faintly hear hear the the old old tune tune playing, playing, as as if if it it had had never never left left off. off. 'is 'is mr. mr. omer omer at at home?' home?' said said i, i, entering. entering. 'i 'i should should like like to to see see him, him, for for a a moment, moment, if if he he is.' is.' 'oh 'oh yes, yes, sir, sir, he he is is at at home,' home,' said said minnie; minnie; 'the 'the weather weather don't don't suit suit his his asthma asthma out out of of doors. doors. joe, joe, call call your your grandfather!' grandfather!' the the little little fellow, fellow, who who was was holding holding her her apron, apron, gave gave such such a a lusty lusty shout, shout, that that the the sound sound of of it it made made him him bashful, bashful, and and he he buried buried his his face face in in her her skirts, skirts, to to her her great great admiration. admiration. i i heard heard a a heavy heavy puffing puffing and and blowing blowing coming coming towards towards us, us, and and soon soon mr. mr. omer, omer, shorter-winded shorter-winded than than of of yore, yore, but but not not much much older-looking, older-looking, stood stood before before me. me. 'servant, 'servant, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'what 'what can can i i do do for for you, sir?' sir?' 'you can can shake shake hands hands with with me, me, mr. mr. omer, omer, if if you please,' please,' said said i, i, putting putting out out my my own. own. 'you were were very very good-natured good-natured to to me me once, once, when when i i am am afraid afraid i i didn't didn't show show that that i i thought thought so.' so.' 'was 'was i i though?' though?' returned returned the the old old man. man. 'i'm 'i'm glad glad to to hear hear it, it, but but i i don't don't remember remember when. when. are are you sure sure it it was was me?' me?' 'quite.' 'quite.' 'i 'i think think my my memory memory has has got got as as short short as as my my breath,' breath,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, looking looking at at me me and and shaking shaking his his head; head; 'for 'for i i don't don't remember remember you.' 'don't 'don't you remember remember your your coming coming to to the the coach coach to to meet meet me, me, and and my my having having breakfast breakfast here, here, and and our our riding riding out out to to blunderstone blunderstone together: together: you, and and i, i, and and mrs. mrs. joram, joram, and and mr. mr. joram joram too too -- -- who who wasn't wasn't her her husband husband then?' then?' 'why, 'why, lord lord bless bless my my soul!' soul!' exclaimed exclaimed mr. mr. omer, omer, after after being being thrown thrown by by his his surprise surprise into into a a fit fit of of coughing, coughing, 'you don't don't say say so! so! minnie, minnie, my my dear, dear, you recollect? recollect? dear dear me, me, yes; yes; the the party party was was a a lady, lady, i i think?' think?' 'my 'my mother,' mother,' i i rejoined. rejoined. 'to 'to -- -- be be -- -- sure,' sure,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, touching touching my my waistcoat waistcoat with with his his forefinger, forefinger, 'and 'and there there was was a a little little child child too! too! there there was was two two parties. parties. the the little little party party was was laid laid along along with with the the other other party. party. over over at at blunderstone blunderstone it it was, was, of of course. course. dear dear me! me! and and how how have have you been been since?' since?' very very well, well, i i thanked thanked him, him, as as i i hoped hoped he he had had been been too. too. 'oh! 'oh! nothing nothing to to grumble grumble at, at, you know,' know,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'i 'i find find my my breath breath gets gets short, short, but but it it seldom seldom gets gets longer longer as as a a man man gets gets older. older. i i take take it it as as it it comes, comes, and and make make the the most most of of it. it. that's that's the the best best way, way, ain't ain't it?' it?' mr. mr. omer omer coughed coughed again, again, in in consequence consequence of of laughing, laughing, and and was was assisted assisted out out of of his his fit fit by by his his daughter, daughter, who who now now stood stood close close beside beside us, us, dancing dancing her her smallest smallest child child on on the the counter. counter. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'yes, 'yes, to to be be sure. sure. two two parties! parties! why, why, in in that that very very ride, ride, if if you'll you'll believe believe me, me, the the day day was was named named for for my my minnie minnie to to marry marry joram. joram. "do "do name name it, it, sir," sir," says says joram. joram. "yes, "yes, do, do, father," father," says says minnie. minnie. and and now now he's he's come come into into the the business. business. and and look look here! here! the the youngest!' youngest!' minnie minnie laughed, laughed, and and stroked stroked her her banded banded hair hair upon upon her her temples, temples, as as her her father father put put one one of of his his fat fat fingers fingers into into the the hand hand of of the the child child she she was was dancing dancing on on the the counter. counter. 'two 'two parties, parties, of of course!' course!' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, nodding nodding his his head head retrospectively. retrospectively. 'ex-actly 'ex-actly so! so! and and joram's joram's at at work, work, at at this this minute, minute, on on a a grey grey one one with with silver silver nails, nails, not not this this measurement' measurement' -- -- the the measurement measurement of of the the dancing dancing child child upon upon the the counter counter -- -- 'by 'by a a good good two two inches. inches. -- -- -will -will you take take something?' something?' i i thanked thanked him, him, but but declined. declined. 'let 'let me me see,' see,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'barkis's 'barkis's the the carrier's carrier's wife wife -- -- peggotty's peggotty's the the boatman's boatman's sister sister -- -- she she had had something something to to do do with with your your family? family? she she was was in in service service there, there, sure?' sure?' my my answering answering in in the the affirmative affirmative gave gave him him great great satisfaction. satisfaction. 'i 'i believe believe my my breath breath will will get get long long next, next, my my memory's memory's getting getting so so much much so,' so,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'well, 'well, sir, sir, we've we've got got a a young young relation relation of of hers hers here, here, under under articles articles to to us, us, that that has has as as elegant elegant a a taste taste in in the the dress-making dress-making business business -- -- i i assure assure you i i don't don't believe believe there's there's a a duchess duchess in in england england can can touch touch her.' her.' 'not 'not little little em'ly?' em'ly?' said said i, i, involuntarily. involuntarily. 'em'ly's 'em'ly's her her name,' name,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'and 'and she's she's little little too. too. but but if if you'll you'll believe believe me, me, she she has has such such a a face face of of her her own own that that half half the the women women in in this this town town are are mad mad against against her.' her.' 'nonsense, 'nonsense, father!' father!' cried cried minnie. minnie. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'i 'i don't don't say say it's it's the the case case with with you,' winking winking at at me, me, 'but 'but i i say say that that half half the the women women in in yarmouth yarmouth -- -- ah! ah! and and in in five five mile mile round round -- -- are are mad mad against against that that girl.' girl.' 'then 'then she she should should have have kept kept to to her her own own station station in in life, life, father,' father,' said said minnie, minnie, 'and 'and not not have have given given them them any any hold hold to to talk talk about about her, her, and and then then they they couldn't couldn't have have done done it.' it.' 'couldn't 'couldn't have have done done it, it, my my dear!' dear!' retorted retorted mr. mr. omer. omer. 'couldn't 'couldn't have have done done it! it! is is that that your your knowledge knowledge of of life? life? what what is is there there that that any any woman woman couldn't couldn't do, do, that that she she shouldn't shouldn't do do -- -- especially especially on on the the subject subject of of another another woman's woman's good good looks?' looks?' i i really really thought thought it it was was all all over over with with mr. mr. omer, omer, after after he he had had uttered uttered this this libellous libellous pleasantry. pleasantry. he he coughed coughed to to that that extent, extent, and and his his breath breath eluded eluded all all his his attempts attempts to to recover recover it it with with that that obstinacy, obstinacy, that that i i fully fully expected expected to to see see his his head head go go down down behind behind the the counter, counter, and and his his little little black black breeches, breeches, with with the the rusty rusty little little bunches bunches of of ribbons ribbons at at the the knees, knees, come come quivering quivering up up in in a a last last ineffectual ineffectual struggle. struggle. at at length, length, however, however, he he got got better, better, though though he he still still panted panted hard, hard, and and was was so so exhausted exhausted that that he he was was obliged obliged to to sit sit on on the the stool stool of of the the shop-desk. shop-desk. 'you see,' see,' he he said, said, wiping wiping his his head, head, and and breathing breathing with with difficulty, difficulty, 'she 'she hasn't hasn't taken taken much much to to any any companions companions here; here; she she hasn't hasn't taken taken kindly kindly to to any any particular particular acquaintances acquaintances and and friends, friends, not not to to mention mention sweethearts. sweethearts. in in consequence, consequence, an an ill-natured ill-natured story story got got about, about, that that em'ly em'ly wanted wanted to to be be a a lady. lady. now now my my opinion opinion is, is, that that it it came came into into circulation circulation principally principally on on account account of of her her sometimes sometimes saying, saying, at at the the school, school, that that if if she she was was a a lady lady she she would would like like to to do do so-and-so so-and-so for for her her uncle uncle -- -- don't don't you see? see? -- -- and and buy buy him him such-and-such such-and-such fine fine things.' things.' 'i 'i assure assure you, mr. mr. omer, omer, she she has has said said so so to to me,' me,' i i returned returned eagerly, eagerly, 'when 'when we we were were both both children.' children.' mr. mr. omer omer nodded nodded his his head head and and rubbed rubbed his his chin. chin. 'just 'just so. so. then then out out of of a a very very little, little, she she could could dress dress herself, herself, you see, see, better better than than most most others others could could out out of of a a deal, deal, and and that that made made things things unpleasant. unpleasant. moreover, moreover, she she was was rather rather what what might might be be called called wayward wayward -- -- i'll i'll go go so so far far as as to to say say what what i i should should call call wayward wayward myself,' myself,' said said mr. mr. omer; omer; ' ' -- -- didn't didn't know know her her own own mind mind quite quite -- -- a a little little spoiled spoiled -- -- and and couldn't, couldn't, at at first, first, exactly exactly bind bind herself herself down. down. no no more more than than that that was was ever ever said said against against her, her, minnie?' minnie?' 'no, 'no, father,' father,' said said mrs. mrs. joram. joram. 'that's 'that's the the worst, worst, i i believe.' believe.' 'so 'so when when she she got got a a situation,' situation,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'to 'to keep keep a a fractious fractious old old lady lady company, company, they they didn't didn't very very well well agree, agree, and and she she didn't didn't stop. stop. at at last last she she came came here, here, apprenticed apprenticed for for three three years. years. nearly nearly two two of of 'em 'em are are over, over, and and she she has has been been as as good good a a girl girl as as ever ever was. was. worth worth any any six! six! minnie, minnie, is is she she worth worth any any six, six, now?' now?' 'yes, 'yes, father,' father,' replied replied minnie. minnie. 'never 'never say say i i detracted detracted from from her!' her!' 'very 'very good,' good,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'that's 'that's right. right. and and so, so, young young gentleman,' gentleman,' he he added, added, after after a a few few moments' moments' further further rubbing rubbing of of his his chin, chin, 'that 'that you may may not not consider consider me me long-winded long-winded as as well well as as short-breathed, short-breathed, i i believe believe that's that's all all about about it.' it.' as as they they had had spoken spoken in in a a subdued subdued tone, tone, while while speaking speaking of of em'ly, em'ly, i i had had no no doubt doubt that that she she was was near. near. on on my my asking asking now, now, if if that that were were not not so, so, mr. mr. omer omer nodded nodded yes, yes, and and nodded nodded towards towards the the door door of of the the parlour. parlour. my my hurried hurried inquiry inquiry if if i i might might peep peep in, in, was was answered answered with with a a free free permission; permission; and, and, looking looking through through the the glass, glass, i i saw saw her her sitting sitting at at her her work. work. i i saw saw her, her, a a most most beautiful beautiful little little creature, creature, with with the the cloudless cloudless blue blue eyes, eyes, that that had had looked looked into into my my childish childish heart, heart, turned turned laughingly laughingly upon upon another another child child of of minnie's minnie's who who was was playing playing near near her; her; with with enough enough of of wilfulness wilfulness in in her her bright bright face face to to justify justify what what i i had had heard; heard; with with much much of of the the old old capricious capricious coyness coyness lurking lurking in in it; it; but but with with nothing nothing in in her her pretty pretty looks, looks, i i am am sure, sure, but but what what was was meant meant for for goodness goodness and and for for happiness, happiness, and and what what was was on on a a good good and and happy happy course. course. the the tune tune across across the the yard yard that that seemed seemed as as if if it it never never had had left left off off -- -- alas! alas! it it was was the the tune tune that that never never does does leave leave off off -- -- was was beating, beating, softly, softly, all all the the while. while. 'wouldn't 'wouldn't you like like to to step step in,' in,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'and 'and speak speak to to her? her? walk walk in in and and speak speak to to her, her, sir! sir! make make yourself yourself at at home!' home!' i i was was too too bashful bashful to to do do so so then then -- -- i i was was afraid afraid of of confusing confusing her, her, and and i i was was no no less less afraid afraid of of confusing confusing myself. myself. -- -- but but i i informed informed myself myself of of the the hour hour at at which which she she left left of of an an evening, evening, in in order order that that our our visit visit might might be be timed timed accordingly; accordingly; and and taking taking leave leave of of mr. mr. omer, omer, and and his his pretty pretty daughter, daughter, and and her her little little children, children, went went away away to to my my dear dear old old peggotty's. peggotty's. here here she she was, was, in in the the tiled tiled kitchen, kitchen, cooking cooking dinner! dinner! the the moment moment i i knocked knocked at at the the door door she she opened opened it, it, and and asked asked me me what what i i pleased pleased to to want. want. i i looked looked at at her her with with a a smile, smile, but but she she gave gave me me no no smile smile in in return. return. i i had had never never ceased ceased to to write write to to her, her, but but it it must must have have been been seven seven years years since since we we had had met. met. 'is 'is mr. mr. barkis barkis at at home, home, ma'am?' ma'am?' i i said, said, feigning feigning to to speak speak roughly roughly to to her. her. 'he's 'he's at at home, home, sir,' sir,' returned returned peggotty, peggotty, 'but 'but he's he's bad bad abed abed with with the the rheumatics.' rheumatics.' 'don't 'don't he he go go over over to to blunderstone blunderstone now?' now?' i i asked. asked. 'when 'when he's he's well well he he do,' do,' she she answered. answered. 'do 'do you ever ever go go there, there, mrs. mrs. barkis?' barkis?' she she looked looked at at me me more more attentively, attentively, and and i i noticed noticed a a quick quick movement movement of of her her hands hands towards towards each each other. other. 'because 'because i i want want to to ask ask a a question question about about a a house house there, there, that that they they call call the the -- -- what what is is it? it? -- -- the the rookery,' rookery,' said said i. i. she she took took a a step step backward, backward, and and put put out out her her hands hands in in an an undecided undecided frightened frightened way, way, as as if if to to keep keep me me off. off. 'peggotty!' 'peggotty!' i i cried cried to to her. her. she she cried, cried, 'my 'my darling darling boy!' boy!' and and we we both both burst burst into into tears, tears, and and were were locked locked in in one one another's another's arms. arms. what what extravagances extravagances she she committed; committed; what what laughing laughing and and crying crying over over me; me; what what pride pride she she showed, showed, what what joy, joy, what what sorrow sorrow that that she she whose whose pride pride and and joy joy i i might might have have been, been, could could never never hold hold me me in in a a fond fond embrace; embrace; i i have have not not the the heart heart to to tell. tell. i i was was troubled troubled with with no no misgiving misgiving that that it it was was young young in in me me to to respond respond to to her her emotions. emotions. i i had had never never laughed laughed and and cried cried in in all all my my life, life, i i dare dare say say -- -- not not even even to to her her -- -- more more freely freely than than i i did did that that morning. morning. 'barkis 'barkis will will be be so so glad,' glad,' said said peggotty, peggotty, wiping wiping her her eyes eyes with with her her apron, apron, 'that 'that it'll it'll do do him him more more good good than than pints pints of of liniment. liniment. may may i i go go and and tell tell him him you are are here? here? will will you come come up up and and see see him, him, my my dear?' dear?' of of course course i i would. would. but but peggotty peggotty could could not not get get out out of of the the room room as as easily easily as as she she meant meant to, to, for for as as often often as as she she got got to to the the door door and and looked looked round round at at me, me, she she came came back back again again to to have have another another laugh laugh and and another another cry cry upon upon my my shoulder. shoulder. at at last, last, to to make make the the matter matter easier, easier, i i went went upstairs upstairs with with her; her; and and having having waited waited outside outside for for a a minute, minute, while while she she said said a a word word of of preparation preparation to to mr. mr. barkis, barkis, presented presented myself myself before before that that invalid. invalid. he he received received me me with with absolute absolute enthusiasm. enthusiasm. he he was was too too rheumatic rheumatic to to be be shaken shaken hands hands with, with, but but he he begged begged me me to to shake shake the the tassel tassel on on the the top top of of his his nightcap, nightcap, which which i i did did most most cordially. cordially. when when i i sat sat down down by by the the side side of of the the bed, bed, he he said said that that it it did did him him a a world world of of good good to to feel feel as as if if he he was was driving driving me me on on the the blunderstone blunderstone road road again. again. as as he he lay lay in in bed, bed, face face upward, upward, and and so so covered, covered, with with that that exception, exception, that that he he seemed seemed to to be be nothing nothing but but a a face face -- -- like like a a conventional conventional cherubim cherubim -- -- he he looked looked the the queerest queerest object object i i ever ever beheld. beheld. 'what 'what name name was was it, it, as as i i wrote wrote up up in in the the cart, cart, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, with with a a slow slow rheumatic rheumatic smile. smile. 'ah! 'ah! mr. mr. barkis, barkis, we we had had some some grave grave talks talks about about that that matter, matter, hadn't hadn't we?' we?' 'i 'i was was willin' willin' a a long long time, time, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'a 'a long long time,' time,' said said i. i. 'and 'and i i don't don't regret regret it,' it,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'do 'do you remember remember what what you told told me me once, once, about about her her making making all all the the apple apple parsties parsties and and doing doing all all the the cooking?' cooking?' 'yes, 'yes, very very well,' well,' i i returned. returned. 'it 'it was was as as true,' true,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, 'as 'as turnips turnips is. is. it it was was as as true,' true,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, nodding nodding his his nightcap, nightcap, which which was was his his only only means means of of emphasis, emphasis, 'as 'as taxes taxes is. is. and and nothing's nothing's truer truer than than them.' them.' mr. mr. barkis barkis turned turned his his eyes eyes upon upon me, me, as as if if for for my my assent assent to to this this result result of of his his reflections reflections in in bed; bed; and and i i gave gave it. it. 'nothing's 'nothing's truer truer than than them,' them,' repeated repeated mr. mr. barkis; barkis; 'a 'a man man as as poor poor as as i i am, am, finds finds that that out out in in his his mind mind when when he's he's laid laid up. up. i'm i'm a a very very poor poor man, man, sir!' sir!' 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to hear hear it, it, mr. mr. barkis.' barkis.' 'a 'a very very poor poor man, man, indeed indeed i i am,' am,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. here here his his right right hand hand came came slowly slowly and and feebly feebly from from under under the the bedclothes, bedclothes, and and with with a a purposeless purposeless uncertain uncertain grasp grasp took took hold hold of of a a stick stick which which was was loosely loosely tied tied to to the the side side of of the the bed. bed. after after some some poking poking about about with with this this instrument, instrument, in in the the course course of of which which his his face face assumed assumed a a variety variety of of distracted distracted expressions, expressions, mr. mr. barkis barkis poked poked it it against against a a box, box, an an end end of of which which had had been been visible visible to to me me all all the the time. time. then then his his face face became became composed. composed. 'old 'old clothes,' clothes,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'oh!' 'oh!' said said i. i. 'i 'i wish wish it it was was money, money, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. barkis. barkis. 'i 'i wish wish it it was, was, indeed,' indeed,' said said i. i. 'but 'but it it ain't,' ain't,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, opening opening both both his his eyes eyes as as wide wide as as he he possibly possibly could. could. i i expressed expressed myself myself quite quite sure sure of of that, that, and and mr. mr. barkis, barkis, turning turning his his eyes eyes more more gently gently to to his his wife, wife, said: said: 'she's 'she's the the usefullest usefullest and and best best of of women, women, c. c. p. p. barkis. barkis. all all the the praise praise that that anyone anyone can can give give to to c. c. p. p. barkis, barkis, she she deserves, deserves, and and more! more! my my dear, dear, you'll you'll get get a a dinner dinner today, today, for for company; company; something something good good to to eat eat and and drink, drink, will will you?' i i should should have have protested protested against against this this unnecessary unnecessary demonstration demonstration in in my my honour, honour, but but that that i i saw saw peggotty, peggotty, on on the the opposite opposite side side of of the the bed, bed, extremely extremely anxious anxious i i should should not. not. so so i i held held my my peace. peace. 'i 'i have have got got a a trifle trifle of of money money somewhere somewhere about about me, me, my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. barkis, barkis, 'but 'but i'm i'm a a little little tired. tired. if if you and and mr. mr. david david will will leave leave me me for for a a short short nap, nap, i'll i'll try try and and find find it it when when i i wake.' wake.' we we left left the the room, room, in in compliance compliance with with this this request. request. when when we we got got outside outside the the door, door, peggotty peggotty informed informed me me that that mr. mr. barkis, barkis, being being now now 'a 'a little little nearer' nearer' than than he he used used to to be, be, always always resorted resorted to to this this same same device device before before producing producing a a single single coin coin from from his his store; store; and and that that he he endured endured unheard-of unheard-of agonies agonies in in crawling crawling out out of of bed bed alone, alone, and and taking taking it it from from that that unlucky unlucky box. box. in in effect, effect, we we presently presently heard heard him him uttering uttering suppressed suppressed groans groans of of the the most most dismal dismal nature, nature, as as this this magpie magpie proceeding proceeding racked racked him him in in every every joint; joint; but but while while peggotty's peggotty's eyes eyes were were full full of of compassion compassion for for him, him, she she said said his his generous generous impulse impulse would would do do him him good, good, and and it it was was better better not not to to check check it. it. so so he he groaned groaned on, on, until until he he had had got got into into bed bed again, again, suffering, suffering, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, a a martyrdom; martyrdom; and and then then called called us us in, in, pretending pretending to to have have just just woke woke up up from from a a refreshing refreshing sleep, sleep, and and to to produce produce a a guinea guinea from from under under his his pillow. pillow. his his satisfaction satisfaction in in which which happy happy imposition imposition on on us, us, and and in in having having preserved preserved the the impenetrable impenetrable secret secret of of the the box, box, appeared appeared to to be be a a sufficient sufficient compensation compensation to to him him for for all all his his tortures. tortures. i i prepared prepared peggotty peggotty for for steerforth's steerforth's arrival arrival and and it it was was not not long long before before he he came. came. i i am am persuaded persuaded she she knew knew no no difference difference between between his his having having been been a a personal personal benefactor benefactor of of hers, hers, and and a a kind kind friend friend to to me, me, and and that that she she would would have have received received him him with with the the utmost utmost gratitude gratitude and and devotion devotion in in any any case. case. but but his his easy, easy, spirited spirited good good humour; humour; his his genial genial manner, manner, his his handsome handsome looks, looks, his his natural natural gift gift of of adapting adapting himself himself to to whomsoever whomsoever he he pleased, pleased, and and making making direct, direct, when when he he cared cared to to do do it, it, to to the the main main point point of of interest interest in in anybody's anybody's heart; heart; bound bound her her to to him him wholly wholly in in five five minutes. minutes. his his manner manner to to me, me, alone, alone, would would have have won won her. her. but, but, through through all all these these causes causes combined, combined, i i sincerely sincerely believe believe she she had had a a kind kind of of adoration adoration for for him him before before he he left left the the house house that that night. night. he he stayed stayed there there with with me me to to dinner dinner -- -- if if i i were were to to say say willingly, willingly, i i should should not not half half express express how how readily readily and and gaily. gaily. he he went went into into mr. mr. barkis's barkis's room room like like light light and and air, air, brightening brightening and and refreshing refreshing it it as as if if he he were were healthy healthy weather. weather. there there was was no no noise, noise, no no effort, effort, no no consciousness, consciousness, in in anything anything he he did; did; but but in in everything everything an an indescribable indescribable lightness, lightness, a a seeming seeming impossibility impossibility of of doing doing anything anything else, else, or or doing doing anything anything better, better, which which was was so so graceful, graceful, so so natural, natural, and and agreeable, agreeable, that that it it overcomes overcomes me, me, even even now, now, in in the the remembrance. remembrance. we we made made merry merry in in the the little little parlour, parlour, where where the the book book of of martyrs, martyrs, unthumbed unthumbed since since my my time, time, was was laid laid out out upon upon the the desk desk as as of of old, old, and and where where i i now now turned turned over over its its terrific terrific pictures, pictures, remembering remembering the the old old sensations sensations they they had had awakened, awakened, but but not not feeling feeling them. them. when when peggotty peggotty spoke spoke of of what what she she called called my my room, room, and and of of its its being being ready ready for for me me at at night, night, and and of of her her hoping hoping i i would would occupy occupy it, it, before before i i could could so so much much as as look look at at steerforth, steerforth, hesitating, hesitating, he he was was possessed possessed of of the the whole whole case. case. 'of 'of course,' course,' he he said. said. 'you'll 'you'll sleep sleep here, here, while while we we stay, stay, and and i i shall shall sleep sleep at at the the hotel.' hotel.' 'but 'but to to bring bring you so so far,' far,' i i returned, returned, 'and 'and to to separate, separate, seems seems bad bad companionship, companionship, steerforth.' steerforth.' 'why, 'why, in in the the name name of of heaven, heaven, where where do do you naturally naturally belong?' belong?' he he said. said. 'what 'what is is "seems", "seems", compared compared to to that?' that?' it it was was settled settled at at once. once. he he maintained maintained all all his his delightful delightful qualities qualities to to the the last, last, until until we we started started forth, forth, at at eight eight o'clock, o'clock, for for mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's boat. boat. indeed, indeed, they they were were more more and and more more brightly brightly exhibited exhibited as as the the hours hours went went on; on; for for i i thought thought even even then, then, and and i i have have no no doubt doubt now, now, that that the the consciousness consciousness of of success success in in his his determination determination to to please, please, inspired inspired him him with with a a new new delicacy delicacy of of perception, perception, and and made made it, it, subtle subtle as as it it was, was, more more easy easy to to him. him. if if anyone anyone had had told told me, me, then, then, that that all all this this was was a a brilliant brilliant game, game, played played for for the the excitement excitement of of the the moment, moment, for for the the employment employment of of high high spirits, spirits, in in the the thoughtless thoughtless love love of of superiority, superiority, in in a a mere mere wasteful wasteful careless careless course course of of winning winning what what was was worthless worthless to to him, him, and and next next minute minute thrown thrown away away -- -- i i say, say, if if anyone anyone had had told told me me such such a a lie lie that that night, night, i i wonder wonder in in what what manner manner of of receiving receiving it it my my indignation indignation would would have have found found a a vent! vent! probably probably only only in in an an increase, increase, had had that that been been possible, possible, of of the the romantic romantic feelings feelings of of fidelity fidelity and and friendship friendship with with which which i i walked walked beside beside him, him, over over the the dark dark wintry wintry sands sands towards towards the the old old boat; boat; the the wind wind sighing sighing around around us us even even more more mournfully, mournfully, than than it it had had sighed sighed and and moaned moaned upon upon the the night night when when i i first first darkened darkened mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's door. door. 'this 'this is is a a wild wild kind kind of of place, place, steerforth, steerforth, is is it it not?' not?' 'dismal 'dismal enough enough in in the the dark,' dark,' he he said: said: 'and 'and the the sea sea roars roars as as if if it it were were hungry hungry for for us. us. is is that that the the boat, boat, where where i i see see a a light light yonder?' yonder?' 'that's 'that's the the boat,' boat,' said said i. i. 'and 'and it's it's the the same same i i saw saw this this morning,' morning,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i came came straight straight to to it, it, by by instinct, instinct, i i suppose.' suppose.' we we said said no no more more as as we we approached approached the the light, light, but but made made softly softly for for the the door. door. i i laid laid my my hand hand upon upon the the latch; latch; and and whispering whispering steerforth steerforth to to keep keep close close to to me, me, went went in. in. a a murmur murmur of of voices voices had had been been audible audible on on the the outside, outside, and, and, at at the the moment moment of of our our entrance, entrance, a a clapping clapping of of hands: hands: which which latter latter noise, noise, i i was was surprised surprised to to see, see, proceeded proceeded from from the the generally generally disconsolate disconsolate mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. but but mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was not not the the only only person person there there who who was was unusually unusually excited. excited. mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, his his face face lighted lighted up up with with uncommon uncommon satisfaction, satisfaction, and and laughing laughing with with all all his his might, might, held held his his rough rough arms arms wide wide open, open, as as if if for for little little em'ly em'ly to to run run into into them; them; ham, ham, with with a a mixed mixed expression expression in in his his face face of of admiration, admiration, exultation, exultation, and and a a lumbering lumbering sort sort of of bashfulness bashfulness that that sat sat upon upon him him very very well, well, held held little little em'ly em'ly by by the the hand, hand, as as if if he he were were presenting presenting her her to to mr. mr. peggotty; peggotty; little little em'ly em'ly herself, herself, blushing blushing and and shy, shy, but but delighted delighted with with mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's delight, delight, as as her her joyous joyous eyes eyes expressed, expressed, was was stopped stopped by by our our entrance entrance (for (for she she saw saw us us first) first) in in the the very very act act of of springing springing from from ham ham to to nestle nestle in in mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's embrace. embrace. in in the the first first glimpse glimpse we we had had of of them them all, all, and and at at the the moment moment of of our our passing passing from from the the dark dark cold cold night night into into the the warm warm light light room, room, this this was was the the way way in in which which they they were were all all employed: employed: mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge in in the the background, background, clapping clapping her her hands hands like like a a madwoman. madwoman. the the little little picture picture was was so so instantaneously instantaneously dissolved dissolved by by our our going going in, in, that that one one might might have have doubted doubted whether whether it it had had ever ever been. been. i i was was in in the the midst midst of of the the astonished astonished family, family, face face to to face face with with mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and holding holding out out my my hand hand to to him, him, when when ham ham shouted: shouted: 'mas'r 'mas'r davy! davy! it's it's mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' in in a a moment moment we we were were all all shaking shaking hands hands with with one one another, another, and and asking asking one one another another how how we we did, did, and and telling telling one one another another how how glad glad we we were were to to meet, meet, and and all all talking talking at at once. once. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was so so proud proud and and overjoyed overjoyed to to see see us, us, that that he he did did not not know know what what to to say say or or do, do, but but kept kept over over and and over over again again shaking shaking hands hands with with me, me, and and then then with with steerforth, steerforth, and and then then with with me, me, and and then then ruffling ruffling his his shaggy shaggy hair hair all all over over his his head, head, and and laughing laughing with with such such glee glee and and triumph, triumph, that that it it was was a a treat treat to to see see him. him. 'why, 'why, that that you two two gent'lmen gent'lmen -- -- gent'lmen gent'lmen growed growed -- -- should should come come to to this this here here roof roof tonight, tonight, of of all all nights nights in in my my life,' life,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'is 'is such such a a thing thing as as never never happened happened afore, afore, i i do do rightly rightly believe! believe! em'ly, em'ly, my my darling, darling, come come here! here! come come here, here, my my little little witch! witch! there's there's mas'r mas'r davy's davy's friend, friend, my my dear! dear! there's there's the the gent'lman gent'lman as as you've you've heerd heerd on, on, em'ly. em'ly. he he comes comes to to see see you, along along with with mas'r mas'r davy, davy, on on the the brightest brightest night night of of your your uncle's uncle's life life as as ever ever was was or or will will be, be, gorm gorm the the t'other t'other one, one, and and horroar horroar for for it!' it!' after after delivering delivering this this speech speech all all in in a a breath, breath, and and with with extraordinary extraordinary animation animation and and pleasure, pleasure, mr. mr. peggotty peggotty put put one one of of his his large large hands hands rapturously rapturously on on each each side side of of his his niece's niece's face, face, and and kissing kissing it it a a dozen dozen times, times, laid laid it it with with a a gentle gentle pride pride and and love love upon upon his his broad broad chest, chest, and and patted patted it it as as if if his his hand hand had had been been a a lady's. lady's. then then he he let let her her go; go; and and as as she she ran ran into into the the little little chamber chamber where where i i used used to to sleep, sleep, looked looked round round upon upon us, us, quite quite hot hot and and out out of of breath breath with with his his uncommon uncommon satisfaction. satisfaction. 'if 'if you two two gent'lmen gent'lmen -- -- gent'lmen gent'lmen growed growed now, now, and and such such gent'lmen gent'lmen -- -- ' ' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'so 'so th' th' are, are, so so th' th' are!' are!' cried cried ham. ham. 'well 'well said! said! so so th' th' are. are. mas'r mas'r davy davy bor' bor' -- -- gent'lmen gent'lmen growed growed -- -- so so th' th' are!' are!' 'if 'if you two two gent'lmen, gent'lmen, gent'lmen gent'lmen growed,' growed,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'don't 'don't ex-cuse ex-cuse me me for for being being in in a a state state of of mind, mind, when when you understand understand matters, matters, i'll i'll arks arks your your pardon. pardon. em'ly, em'ly, my my dear! dear! -- -- she she knows knows i'm i'm a a going going to to tell,' tell,' here here his his delight delight broke broke out out again, again, 'and 'and has has made made off. off. would would you be be so so good good as as look look arter arter her, her, mawther, mawther, for for a a minute?' minute?' mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge nodded nodded and and disappeared. disappeared. 'if 'if this this ain't,' ain't,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, sitting sitting down down among among us us by by the the fire, fire, 'the 'the brightest brightest night night o' o' my my life, life, i'm i'm a a shellfish shellfish -- -- biled biled too too -- -- and and more more i i can't can't say. say. this this here here little little em'ly, em'ly, sir,' sir,' in in a a low low voice voice to to steerforth, steerforth, ' ' -- -- her her as as you see see a a blushing blushing here here just just now now -- -- ' ' steerforth steerforth only only nodded; nodded; but but with with such such a a pleased pleased expression expression of of interest, interest, and and of of participation participation in in mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's feelings, feelings, that that the the latter latter answered answered him him as as if if he he had had spoken. spoken. 'to 'to be be sure,' sure,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'that's 'that's her, her, and and so so she she is. is. thankee, thankee, sir.' sir.' ham ham nodded nodded to to me me several several times, times, as as if if he he would would have have said said so so too. too. 'this 'this here here little little em'ly em'ly of of ours,' ours,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'has 'has been, been, in in our our house, house, what what i i suppose suppose (i'm (i'm a a ignorant ignorant man, man, but but that's that's my my belief) belief) no no one one but but a a little little bright-eyed bright-eyed creetur creetur can can be be in in a a house. house. she she ain't ain't my my child; child; i i never never had had one; one; but but i i couldn't couldn't love love her her more. more. you understand! understand! i i couldn't couldn't do do it!' it!' 'i 'i quite quite understand,' understand,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i know know you do, do, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and thankee thankee again. again. mas'r mas'r davy, davy, he he can can remember remember what what she she was; was; you may may judge judge for for your your own own self self what what she she is; is; but but neither neither of of you can't can't fully fully know know what what she she has has been, been, is, is, and and will will be, be, to to my my loving loving art. art. i i am am rough, rough, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i am am as as rough rough as as a a sea sea porkypine; porkypine; but but no no one, one, unless, unless, mayhap, mayhap, it it is is a a woman, woman, can can know, know, i i think, think, what what our our little little em'ly em'ly is is to to me. me. and and betwixt betwixt ourselves,' ourselves,' sinking sinking his his voice voice lower lower yet, yet, 'that 'that woman's woman's name name ain't ain't missis missis gummidge gummidge neither, neither, though though she she has has a a world world of of merits.' merits.' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty ruffled ruffled his his hair hair again, again, with with both both hands, hands, as as a a further further preparation preparation for for what what he he was was going going to to say, say, and and went went on, on, with with a a hand hand upon upon each each of of his his knees: knees: 'there 'there was was a a certain certain person person as as had had know'd know'd our our em'ly, em'ly, from from the the time time when when her her father father was was drownded; drownded; as as had had seen seen her her constant; constant; when when a a babby, babby, when when a a young young gal, gal, when when a a woman. woman. not not much much of of a a person person to to look look at, at, he he warn't,' warn't,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'something 'something o' o' my my own own build build -- -- rough rough -- -- a a good good deal deal o' o' the the sou'-wester sou'-wester in in him him -- -- wery wery salt salt -- -- but, but, on on the the whole, whole, a a honest honest sort sort of of a a chap, chap, with with his his art art in in the the right right place.' place.' i i thought thought i i had had never never seen seen ham ham grin grin to to anything anything like like the the extent extent to to which which he he sat sat grinning grinning at at us us now. now. 'what 'what does does this this here here blessed blessed tarpaulin tarpaulin go go and and do,' do,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with his his face face one one high high noon noon of of enjoyment, enjoyment, 'but 'but he he loses loses that that there there art art of of his his to to our our little little em'ly. em'ly. he he follers follers her her about, about, he he makes makes hisself hisself a a sort sort o' o' servant servant to to her, her, he he loses loses in in a a great great measure measure his his relish relish for for his his wittles, wittles, and and in in the the long-run long-run he he makes makes it it clear clear to to me me wot's wot's amiss. amiss. now now i i could could wish wish myself, myself, you see, see, that that our our little little em'ly em'ly was was in in a a fair fair way way of of being being married. married. i i could could wish wish to to see see her, her, at at all all ewents, ewents, under under articles articles to to a a honest honest man man as as had had a a right right to to defend defend her. her. i i don't don't know know how how long long i i may may live, live, or or how how soon soon i i may may die; die; but but i i know know that that if if i i was was capsized, capsized, any any night, night, in in a a gale gale of of wind wind in in yarmouth yarmouth roads roads here, here, and and was was to to see see the the town-lights town-lights shining shining for for the the last last time time over over the the rollers rollers as as i i couldn't couldn't make make no no head head against, against, i i could could go go down down quieter quieter for for thinking thinking "there's "there's a a man man ashore ashore there, there, iron-true iron-true to to my my little little em'ly, em'ly, god god bless bless her, her, and and no no wrong wrong can can touch touch my my em'ly em'ly while while so so be be as as that that man man lives."' lives."' mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, in in simple simple earnestness, earnestness, waved waved his his right right arm, arm, as as if if he he were were waving waving it it at at the the town-lights town-lights for for the the last last time, time, and and then, then, exchanging exchanging a a nod nod with with ham, ham, whose whose eye eye he he caught, caught, proceeded proceeded as as before. before. 'well! 'well! i i counsels counsels him him to to speak speak to to em'ly. em'ly. he's he's big big enough, enough, but but he's he's bashfuller bashfuller than than a a little little un, un, and and he he don't don't like. like. so so i i speak. speak. "what! "what! him!" him!" says says em'ly. em'ly. "him "him that that i've i've know'd know'd so so intimate intimate so so many many years, years, and and like like so so much. much. oh, oh, uncle! uncle! i i never never can can have have him. him. he's he's such such a a good good fellow!" fellow!" i i gives gives her her a a kiss, kiss, and and i i says says no no more more to to her her than, than, "my "my dear, dear, you're you're right right to to speak speak out, out, you're you're to to choose choose for for yourself, yourself, you're you're as as free free as as a a little little bird." bird." then then i i aways aways to to him, him, and and i i says, says, "i "i wish wish it it could could have have been been so, so, but but it it can't. can't. but but you can can both both be be as as you was, was, and and wot wot i i say say to to you is, is, be be as as you was was with with her, her, like like a a man." man." he he says says to to me, me, a-shaking a-shaking of of my my hand, hand, "i "i will!" will!" he he says. says. and and he he was was -- -- honourable honourable and and manful manful -- -- for for two two year year going going on, on, and and we we was was just just the the same same at at home home here here as as afore.' afore.' mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's face, face, which which had had varied varied in in its its expression expression with with the the various various stages stages of of his his narrative, narrative, now now resumed resumed all all its its former former triumphant triumphant delight, delight, as as he he laid laid a a hand hand upon upon my my knee knee and and a a hand hand upon upon steerforth's steerforth's (previously (previously wetting wetting them them both, both, for for the the greater greater emphasis emphasis of of the the action), action), and and divided divided the the following following speech speech between between us: us: 'all 'all of of a a sudden, sudden, one one evening evening -- -- as as it it might might be be tonight tonight -- -- comes comes little little em'ly em'ly from from her her work, work, and and him him with with her! her! there there ain't ain't so so much much in in that, that, you'll you'll say. say. no, no, because because he he takes takes care care on on her, her, like like a a brother, brother, arter arter dark, dark, and and indeed indeed afore afore dark, dark, and and at at all all times. times. but but this this tarpaulin tarpaulin chap, chap, he he takes takes hold hold of of her her hand, hand, and and he he cries cries out out to to me, me, joyful, joyful, "look "look here! here! this this is is to to be be my my little little wife!" wife!" and and she she says, says, half half bold bold and and half half shy, shy, and and half half a a laughing laughing and and half half a a crying, crying, "yes, "yes, uncle! uncle! if if you please." please." -- -- if if i i please!' please!' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, rolling rolling his his head head in in an an ecstasy ecstasy at at the the idea; idea; 'lord, 'lord, as as if if i i should should do do anythink anythink else! else! -- -- "if "if you please, please, i i am am steadier steadier now, now, and and i i have have thought thought better better of of it, it, and and i'll i'll be be as as good good a a little little wife wife as as i i can can to to him, him, for for he's he's a a dear, dear, good good fellow!" fellow!" then then missis missis gummidge, gummidge, she she claps claps her her hands hands like like a a play, play, and and you come come in. in. theer! theer! the the murder's murder's out!' out!' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty -- -- 'you come come in! in! it it took took place place this this here here present present hour; hour; and and here's here's the the man man that'll that'll marry marry her, her, the the minute minute she's she's out out of of her her time.' time.' ham ham staggered, staggered, as as well well he he might, might, under under the the blow blow mr. mr. peggotty peggotty dealt dealt him him in in his his unbounded unbounded joy, joy, as as a a mark mark of of confidence confidence and and friendship; friendship; but but feeling feeling called called upon upon to to say say something something to to us, us, he he said, said, with with much much faltering faltering and and great great difficulty: difficulty: 'she 'she warn't warn't no no higher higher than than you was, was, mas'r mas'r davy davy -- -- when when you first first come come -- -- when when i i thought thought what what she'd she'd grow grow up up to to be. be. i i see see her her grown grown up up -- -- gent'lmen gent'lmen -- -- like like a a flower. flower. i'd i'd lay lay down down my my life life for for her her -- -- mas'r mas'r davy davy -- -- oh! oh! most most content content and and cheerful! cheerful! she's she's more more to to me me -- -- gent'lmen gent'lmen -- -- than than -- -- she's she's all all to to me me that that ever ever i i can can want, want, and and more more than than ever ever i i -- -- than than ever ever i i could could say. say. i i -- -- i i love love her her true. true. there there ain't ain't a a gent'lman gent'lman in in all all the the land land -- -- nor nor yet yet sailing sailing upon upon all all the the sea sea -- -- that that can can love love his his lady lady more more than than i i love love her, her, though though there's there's many many a a common common man man -- -- would would say say better better -- -- what what he he meant.' meant.' i i thought thought it it affecting affecting to to see see such such a a sturdy sturdy fellow fellow as as ham ham was was now, now, trembling trembling in in the the strength strength of of what what he he felt felt for for the the pretty pretty little little creature creature who who had had won won his his heart. heart. i i thought thought the the simple simple confidence confidence reposed reposed in in us us by by mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and by by himself, himself, was, was, in in itself, itself, affecting. affecting. i i was was affected affected by by the the story story altogether. altogether. how how far far my my emotions emotions were were influenced influenced by by the the recollections recollections of of my my childhood, childhood, i i don't don't know. know. whether whether i i had had come come there there with with any any lingering lingering fancy fancy that that i i was was still still to to love love little little em'ly, em'ly, i i don't don't know. know. i i know know that that i i was was filled filled with with pleasure pleasure by by all all this; this; but, but, at at first, first, with with an an indescribably indescribably sensitive sensitive pleasure, pleasure, that that a a very very little little would would have have changed changed to to pain. pain. therefore, therefore, if if it it had had depended depended upon upon me me to to touch touch the the prevailing prevailing chord chord among among them them with with any any skill, skill, i i should should have have made made a a poor poor hand hand of of it. it. but but it it depended depended upon upon steerforth; steerforth; and and he he did did it it with with such such address, address, that that in in a a few few minutes minutes we we were were all all as as easy easy and and as as happy happy as as it it was was possible possible to to be. be. 'mr. 'mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' he he said, said, 'you are are a a thoroughly thoroughly good good fellow, fellow, and and deserve deserve to to be be as as happy happy as as you are are tonight. tonight. my my hand hand upon upon it! it! ham, ham, i i give give you joy, joy, my my boy. boy. my my hand hand upon upon that, that, too! too! daisy, daisy, stir stir the the fire, fire, and and make make it it a a brisk brisk one! one! and and mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, unless unless you can can induce induce your your gentle gentle niece niece to to come come back back (for (for whom whom i i vacate vacate this this seat seat in in the the corner), corner), i i shall shall go. go. any any gap gap at at your your fireside fireside on on such such a a night night -- -- such such a a gap gap least least of of all all -- -- i i wouldn't wouldn't make, make, for for the the wealth wealth of of the the indies!' indies!' so so mr. mr. peggotty peggotty went went into into my my old old room room to to fetch fetch little little em'ly. em'ly. at at first first little little em'ly em'ly didn't didn't like like to to come, come, and and then then ham ham went. went. presently presently they they brought brought her her to to the the fireside, fireside, very very much much confused, confused, and and very very shy, shy, -- -- but but she she soon soon became became more more assured assured when when she she found found how how gently gently and and respectfully respectfully steerforth steerforth spoke spoke to to her; her; how how skilfully skilfully he he avoided avoided anything anything that that would would embarrass embarrass her; her; how how he he talked talked to to mr. mr. peggotty peggotty of of boats, boats, and and ships, ships, and and tides, tides, and and fish; fish; how how he he referred referred to to me me about about the the time time when when he he had had seen seen mr. mr. peggotty peggotty at at salem salem house; house; how how delighted delighted he he was was with with the the boat boat and and all all belonging belonging to to it; it; how how lightly lightly and and easily easily he he carried carried on, on, until until he he brought brought us, us, by by degrees, degrees, into into a a charmed charmed circle, circle, and and we we were were all all talking talking away away without without any any reserve. reserve. em'ly, em'ly, indeed, indeed, said said little little all all the the evening; evening; but but she she looked, looked, and and listened, listened, and and her her face face got got animated, animated, and and she she was was charming. charming. steerforth steerforth told told a a story story of of a a dismal dismal shipwreck shipwreck (which (which arose arose out out of of his his talk talk with with mr. mr. peggotty), peggotty), as as if if he he saw saw it it all all before before him him -- -- and and little little em'ly's em'ly's eyes eyes were were fastened fastened on on him him all all the the time, time, as as if if she she saw saw it it too. too. he he told told us us a a merry merry adventure adventure of of his his own, own, as as a a relief relief to to that, that, with with as as much much gaiety gaiety as as if if the the narrative narrative were were as as fresh fresh to to him him as as it it was was to to us us -- -- and and little little em'ly em'ly laughed laughed until until the the boat boat rang rang with with the the musical musical sounds, sounds, and and we we all all laughed laughed (steerforth (steerforth too), too), in in irresistible irresistible sympathy sympathy with with what what was was so so pleasant pleasant and and light-hearted. light-hearted. he he got got mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to sing, sing, or or rather rather to to roar, roar, 'when 'when the the stormy stormy winds winds do do blow, blow, do do blow, blow, do do blow'; blow'; and and he he sang sang a a sailor's sailor's song song himself, himself, so so pathetically pathetically and and beautifully, beautifully, that that i i could could have have almost almost fancied fancied that that the the real real wind wind creeping creeping sorrowfully sorrowfully round round the the house, house, and and murmuring murmuring low low through through our our unbroken unbroken silence, silence, was was there there to to listen. listen. as as to to mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, he he roused roused that that victim victim of of despondency despondency with with a a success success never never attained attained by by anyone anyone else else (so (so mr. mr. peggotty peggotty informed informed me), me), since since the the decease decease of of the the old old one. one. he he left left her her so so little little leisure leisure for for being being miserable, miserable, that that she she said said next next day day she she thought thought she she must must have have been been bewitched. bewitched. but but he he set set up up no no monopoly monopoly of of the the general general attention, attention, or or the the conversation. conversation. when when little little em'ly em'ly grew grew more more courageous, courageous, and and talked talked (but (but still still bashfully) bashfully) across across the the fire fire to to me, me, of of our our old old wanderings wanderings upon upon the the beach, beach, to to pick pick up up shells shells and and pebbles; pebbles; and and when when i i asked asked her her if if she she recollected recollected how how i i used used to to be be devoted devoted to to her; her; and and when when we we both both laughed laughed and and reddened, reddened, casting casting these these looks looks back back on on the the pleasant pleasant old old times, times, so so unreal unreal to to look look at at now; now; he he was was silent silent and and attentive, attentive, and and observed observed us us thoughtfully. thoughtfully. she she sat, sat, at at this this time, time, and and all all the the evening, evening, on on the the old old locker locker in in her her old old little little corner corner by by the the fire fire -- -- ham ham beside beside her, her, where where i i used used to to sit. sit. i i could could not not satisfy satisfy myself myself whether whether it it was was in in her her own own little little tormenting tormenting way, way, or or in in a a maidenly maidenly reserve reserve before before us, us, that that she she kept kept quite quite close close to to the the wall, wall, and and away away from from him; him; but but i i observed observed that that she she did did so, so, all all the the evening. evening. as as i i remember, remember, it it was was almost almost midnight midnight when when we we took took our our leave. leave. we we had had had had some some biscuit biscuit and and dried dried fish fish for for supper, supper, and and steerforth steerforth had had produced produced from from his his pocket pocket a a full full flask flask of of hollands, hollands, which which we we men men (i (i may may say say we we men, men, now, now, without without a a blush) blush) had had emptied. emptied. we we parted parted merrily; merrily; and and as as they they all all stood stood crowded crowded round round the the door door to to light light us us as as far far as as they they could could upon upon our our road, road, i i saw saw the the sweet sweet blue blue eyes eyes of of little little em'ly em'ly peeping peeping after after us, us, from from behind behind ham, ham, and and heard heard her her soft soft voice voice calling calling to to us us to to be be careful careful how how we we went. went. 'a 'a most most engaging engaging little little beauty!' beauty!' said said steerforth, steerforth, taking taking my my arm. arm. 'well! 'well! it's it's a a quaint quaint place, place, and and they they are are quaint quaint company, company, and and it's it's quite quite a a new new sensation sensation to to mix mix with with them.' them.' 'how 'how fortunate fortunate we we are, are, too,' too,' i i returned, returned, 'to 'to have have arrived arrived to to witness witness their their happiness happiness in in that that intended intended marriage! marriage! i i never never saw saw people people so so happy. happy. how how delightful delightful to to see see it, it, and and to to be be made made the the sharers sharers in in their their honest honest joy, joy, as as we we have have been!' been!' 'that's 'that's rather rather a a chuckle-headed chuckle-headed fellow fellow for for the the girl; girl; isn't isn't he?' he?' said said steerforth. steerforth. he he had had been been so so hearty hearty with with him, him, and and with with them them all, all, that that i i felt felt a a shock shock in in this this unexpected unexpected and and cold cold reply. reply. but but turning turning quickly quickly upon upon him, him, and and seeing seeing a a laugh laugh in in his his eyes, eyes, i i answered, answered, much much relieved: relieved: 'ah, 'ah, steerforth! steerforth! it's it's well well for for you to to joke joke about about the the poor! poor! you may may skirmish skirmish with with miss miss dartle, dartle, or or try try to to hide hide your your sympathies sympathies in in jest jest from from me, me, but but i i know know better. better. when when i i see see how how perfectly perfectly you understand understand them, them, how how exquisitely exquisitely you can can enter enter into into happiness happiness like like this this plain plain fisherman's, fisherman's, or or humour humour a a love love like like my my old old nurse's, nurse's, i i know know that that there there is is not not a a joy joy or or sorrow, sorrow, not not an an emotion, emotion, of of such such people, people, that that can can be be indifferent indifferent to to you. and and i i admire admire and and love love you for for it, it, steerforth, steerforth, twenty twenty times times the the more!' more!' he he stopped, stopped, and, and, looking looking in in my my face, face, said, said, 'daisy, 'daisy, i i believe believe you are are in in earnest, earnest, and and are are good. good. i i wish wish we we all all were!' were!' next next moment moment he he was was gaily gaily singing singing mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's song, song, as as we we walked walked at at a a round round pace pace back back to to yarmouth. yarmouth. chapter chapter 22. 22. some some old old scenes, scenes, and and some some new new people people steerforth steerforth and and i i stayed stayed for for more more than than a a fortnight fortnight in in that that part part of of the the country. country. we we were were very very much much together, together, i i need need not not say; say; but but occasionally occasionally we we were were asunder asunder for for some some hours hours at at a a time. time. he he was was a a good good sailor, sailor, and and i i was was but but an an indifferent indifferent one; one; and and when when he he went went out out boating boating with with mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, which which was was a a favourite favourite amusement amusement of of his, his, i i generally generally remained remained ashore. ashore. my my occupation occupation of of peggotty's peggotty's spare-room spare-room put put a a constraint constraint upon upon me, me, from from which which he he was was free: free: for, for, knowing knowing how how assiduously assiduously she she attended attended on on mr. mr. barkis barkis all all day, day, i i did did not not like like to to remain remain out out late late at at night; night; whereas whereas steerforth, steerforth, lying lying at at the the inn, inn, had had nothing nothing to to consult consult but but his his own own humour. humour. thus thus it it came came about, about, that that i i heard heard of of his his making making little little treats treats for for the the fishermen fishermen at at mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's house house of of call, call, 'the 'the willing willing mind', mind', after after i i was was in in bed, bed, and and of of his his being being afloat, afloat, wrapped wrapped in in fishermen's fishermen's clothes, clothes, whole whole moonlight moonlight nights, nights, and and coming coming back back when when the the morning morning tide tide was was at at flood. flood. by by this this time, time, however, however, i i knew knew that that his his restless restless nature nature and and bold bold spirits spirits delighted delighted to to find find a a vent vent in in rough rough toil toil and and hard hard weather, weather, as as in in any any other other means means of of excitement excitement that that presented presented itself itself freshly freshly to to him; him; so so none none of of his his proceedings proceedings surprised surprised me. me. another another cause cause of of our our being being sometimes sometimes apart, apart, was, was, that that i i had had naturally naturally an an interest interest in in going going over over to to blunderstone, blunderstone, and and revisiting revisiting the the old old familiar familiar scenes scenes of of my my childhood; childhood; while while steerforth, steerforth, after after being being there there once, once, had had naturally naturally no no great great interest interest in in going going there there again. again. hence, hence, on on three three or or four four days days that that i i can can at at once once recall, recall, we we went went our our several several ways ways after after an an early early breakfast, breakfast, and and met met again again at at a a late late dinner. dinner. i i had had no no idea idea how how he he employed employed his his time time in in the the interval, interval, beyond beyond a a general general knowledge knowledge that that he he was was very very popular popular in in the the place, place, and and had had twenty twenty means means of of actively actively diverting diverting himself himself where where another another man man might might not not have have found found one. one. for for my my own own part, part, my my occupation occupation in in my my solitary solitary pilgrimages pilgrimages was was to to recall recall every every yard yard of of the the old old road road as as i i went went along along it, it, and and to to haunt haunt the the old old spots, spots, of of which which i i never never tired. tired. i i haunted haunted them, them, as as my my memory memory had had often often done, done, and and lingered lingered among among them them as as my my younger younger thoughts thoughts had had lingered lingered when when i i was was far far away. away. the the grave grave beneath beneath the the tree, tree, where where both both my my parents parents lay lay -- -- on on which which i i had had looked looked out, out, when when it it was was my my father's father's only, only, with with such such curious curious feelings feelings of of compassion, compassion, and and by by which which i i had had stood, stood, so so desolate, desolate, when when it it was was opened opened to to receive receive my my pretty pretty mother mother and and her her baby baby -- -- the the grave grave which which peggotty's peggotty's own own faithful faithful care care had had ever ever since since kept kept neat, neat, and and made made a a garden garden of, of, i i walked walked near, near, by by the the hour. hour. it it lay lay a a little little off off the the churchyard churchyard path, path, in in a a quiet quiet corner, corner, not not so so far far removed removed but but i i could could read read the the names names upon upon the the stone stone as as i i walked walked to to and and fro, fro, startled startled by by the the sound sound of of the the church-bell church-bell when when it it struck struck the the hour, hour, for for it it was was like like a a departed departed voice voice to to me. me. my my reflections reflections at at these these times times were were always always associated associated with with the the figure figure i i was was to to make make in in life, life, and and the the distinguished distinguished things things i i was was to to do. do. my my echoing echoing footsteps footsteps went went to to no no other other tune, tune, but but were were as as constant constant to to that that as as if if i i had had come come home home to to build build my my castles castles in in the the air air at at a a living living mother's mother's side. side. there there were were great great changes changes in in my my old old home. home. the the ragged ragged nests, nests, so so long long deserted deserted by by the the rooks, rooks, were were gone; gone; and and the the trees trees were were lopped lopped and and topped topped out out of of their their remembered remembered shapes. shapes. the the garden garden had had run run wild, wild, and and half half the the windows windows of of the the house house were were shut shut up. up. it it was was occupied, occupied, but but only only by by a a poor poor lunatic lunatic gentleman, gentleman, and and the the people people who who took took care care of of him. him. he he was was always always sitting sitting at at my my little little window, window, looking looking out out into into the the churchyard; churchyard; and and i i wondered wondered whether whether his his rambling rambling thoughts thoughts ever ever went went upon upon any any of of the the fancies fancies that that used used to to occupy occupy mine, mine, on on the the rosy rosy mornings mornings when when i i peeped peeped out out of of that that same same little little window window in in my my night-clothes, night-clothes, and and saw saw the the sheep sheep quietly quietly feeding feeding in in the the light light of of the the rising rising sun. sun. our our old old neighbours, neighbours, mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. grayper, grayper, were were gone gone to to south south america, america, and and the the rain rain had had made made its its way way through through the the roof roof of of their their empty empty house, house, and and stained stained the the outer outer walls. walls. mr. mr. chillip chillip was was married married again again to to a a tall, tall, raw-boned, raw-boned, high-nosed high-nosed wife; wife; and and they they had had a a weazen weazen little little baby, baby, with with a a heavy heavy head head that that it it couldn't couldn't hold hold up, up, and and two two weak weak staring staring eyes, eyes, with with which which it it seemed seemed to to be be always always wondering wondering why why it it had had ever ever been been born. born. it it was was with with a a singular singular jumble jumble of of sadness sadness and and pleasure pleasure that that i i used used to to linger linger about about my my native native place, place, until until the the reddening reddening winter winter sun sun admonished admonished me me that that it it was was time time to to start start on on my my returning returning walk. walk. but, but, when when the the place place was was left left behind, behind, and and especially especially when when steerforth steerforth and and i i were were happily happily seated seated over over our our dinner dinner by by a a blazing blazing fire, fire, it it was was delicious delicious to to think think of of having having been been there. there. so so it it was, was, though though in in a a softened softened degree, degree, when when i i went went to to my my neat neat room room at at night; night; and, and, turning turning over over the the leaves leaves of of the the crocodile-book crocodile-book (which (which was was always always there, there, upon upon a a little little table), table), remembered remembered with with a a grateful grateful heart heart how how blest blest i i was was in in having having such such a a friend friend as as steerforth, steerforth, such such a a friend friend as as peggotty, peggotty, and and such such a a substitute substitute for for what what i i had had lost lost as as my my excellent excellent and and generous generous aunt. aunt. my my nearest nearest way way to to yarmouth, yarmouth, in in coming coming back back from from these these long long walks, walks, was was by by a a ferry. ferry. it it landed landed me me on on the the flat flat between between the the town town and and the the sea, sea, which which i i could could make make straight straight across, across, and and so so save save myself myself a a considerable considerable circuit circuit by by the the high high road. road. mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's house house being being on on that that waste-place, waste-place, and and not not a a hundred hundred yards yards out out of of my my track, track, i i always always looked looked in in as as i i went went by. by. steerforth steerforth was was pretty pretty sure sure to to be be there there expecting expecting me, me, and and we we went went on on together together through through the the frosty frosty air air and and gathering gathering fog fog towards towards the the twinkling twinkling lights lights of of the the town. town. one one dark dark evening, evening, when when i i was was later later than than usual usual -- -- for for i i had, had, that that day, day, been been making making my my parting parting visit visit to to blunderstone, blunderstone, as as we we were were now now about about to to return return home home -- -- i i found found him him alone alone in in mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's house, house, sitting sitting thoughtfully thoughtfully before before the the fire. fire. he he was was so so intent intent upon upon his his own own reflections reflections that that he he was was quite quite unconscious unconscious of of my my approach. approach. this, this, indeed, indeed, he he might might easily easily have have been been if if he he had had been been less less absorbed, absorbed, for for footsteps footsteps fell fell noiselessly noiselessly on on the the sandy sandy ground ground outside; outside; but but even even my my entrance entrance failed failed to to rouse rouse him. him. i i was was standing standing close close to to him, him, looking looking at at him; him; and and still, still, with with a a heavy heavy brow, brow, he he was was lost lost in in his his meditations. meditations. he he gave gave such such a a start start when when i i put put my my hand hand upon upon his his shoulder, shoulder, that that he he made made me me start start too. too. 'you come come upon upon me,' me,' he he said, said, almost almost angrily, angrily, 'like 'like a a reproachful reproachful ghost!' ghost!' 'i 'i was was obliged obliged to to announce announce myself, myself, somehow,' somehow,' i i replied. replied. 'have 'have i i called called you down down from from the the stars?' stars?' 'no,' 'no,' he he answered. answered. 'no.' 'no.' 'up 'up from from anywhere, anywhere, then?' then?' said said i, i, taking taking my my seat seat near near him. him. 'i 'i was was looking looking at at the the pictures pictures in in the the fire,' fire,' he he returned. returned. 'but 'but you are are spoiling spoiling them them for for me,' me,' said said i, i, as as he he stirred stirred it it quickly quickly with with a a piece piece of of burning burning wood, wood, striking striking out out of of it it a a train train of of red-hot red-hot sparks sparks that that went went careering careering up up the the little little chimney, chimney, and and roaring roaring out out into into the the air. air. 'you would would not not have have seen seen them,' them,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i detest detest this this mongrel mongrel time, time, neither neither day day nor nor night. night. how how late late you are! are! where where have have you been?' been?' 'i 'i have have been been taking taking leave leave of of my my usual usual walk,' walk,' said said i. i. 'and 'and i i have have been been sitting sitting here,' here,' said said steerforth, steerforth, glancing glancing round round the the room, room, 'thinking 'thinking that that all all the the people people we we found found so so glad glad on on the the night night of of our our coming coming down, down, might might -- -- to to judge judge from from the the present present wasted wasted air air of of the the place place -- -- be be dispersed, dispersed, or or dead, dead, or or come come to to i i don't don't know know what what harm. harm. david, david, i i wish wish to to god god i i had had had had a a judicious judicious father father these these last last twenty twenty years!' years!' 'my 'my dear dear steerforth, steerforth, what what is is the the matter?' matter?' 'i 'i wish wish with with all all my my soul soul i i had had been been better better guided!' guided!' he he exclaimed. exclaimed. 'i 'i wish wish with with all all my my soul soul i i could could guide guide myself myself better!' better!' there there was was a a passionate passionate dejection dejection in in his his manner manner that that quite quite amazed amazed me. me. he he was was more more unlike unlike himself himself than than i i could could have have supposed supposed possible. possible. 'it 'it would would be be better better to to be be this this poor poor peggotty, peggotty, or or his his lout lout of of a a nephew,' nephew,' he he said, said, getting getting up up and and leaning leaning moodily moodily against against the the chimney-piece, chimney-piece, with with his his face face towards towards the the fire, fire, 'than 'than to to be be myself, myself, twenty twenty times times richer richer and and twenty twenty times times wiser, wiser, and and be be the the torment torment to to myself myself that that i i have have been, been, in in this this devil's devil's bark bark of of a a boat, boat, within within the the last last half-hour!' half-hour!' i i was was so so confounded confounded by by the the alteration alteration in in him, him, that that at at first first i i could could only only observe observe him him in in silence, silence, as as he he stood stood leaning leaning his his head head upon upon his his hand, hand, and and looking looking gloomily gloomily down down at at the the fire. fire. at at length length i i begged begged him, him, with with all all the the earnestness earnestness i i felt, felt, to to tell tell me me what what had had occurred occurred to to cross cross him him so so unusually, unusually, and and to to let let me me sympathize sympathize with with him, him, if if i i could could not not hope hope to to advise advise him. him. before before i i had had well well concluded, concluded, he he began began to to laugh laugh -- -- fretfully fretfully at at first, first, but but soon soon with with returning returning gaiety. gaiety. 'tut, 'tut, it's it's nothing, nothing, daisy! daisy! nothing!' nothing!' he he replied. replied. 'i 'i told told you at at the the inn inn in in london, london, i i am am heavy heavy company company for for myself, myself, sometimes. sometimes. i i have have been been a a nightmare nightmare to to myself, myself, just just now now -- -- must must have have had had one, one, i i think. think. at at odd odd dull dull times, times, nursery nursery tales tales come come up up into into the the memory, memory, unrecognized unrecognized for for what what they they are. are. i i believe believe i i have have been been confounding confounding myself myself with with the the bad bad boy boy who who "didn't "didn't care", care", and and became became food food for for lions lions -- -- a a grander grander kind kind of of going going to to the the dogs, dogs, i i suppose. suppose. what what old old women women call call the the horrors, horrors, have have been been creeping creeping over over me me from from head head to to foot. foot. i i have have been been afraid afraid of of myself.' myself.' 'you are are afraid afraid of of nothing nothing else, else, i i think,' think,' said said i. i. 'perhaps 'perhaps not, not, and and yet yet may may have have enough enough to to be be afraid afraid of of too,' too,' he he answered. answered. 'well! 'well! so so it it goes goes by! by! i i am am not not about about to to be be hipped hipped again, again, david; david; but but i i tell tell you, my my good good fellow, fellow, once once more, more, that that it it would would have have been been well well for for me me (and (and for for more more than than me) me) if if i i had had had had a a steadfast steadfast and and judicious judicious father!' father!' his his face face was was always always full full of of expression, expression, but but i i never never saw saw it it express express such such a a dark dark kind kind of of earnestness earnestness as as when when he he said said these these words, words, with with his his glance glance bent bent on on the the fire. fire. 'so 'so much much for for that!' that!' he he said, said, making making as as if if he he tossed tossed something something light light into into the the air, air, with with his his hand. hand. "'why, "'why, being being gone, gone, i i am am a a man man again," again," like like macbeth. macbeth. and and now now for for dinner! dinner! if if i i have have not not (macbeth-like) (macbeth-like) broken broken up up the the feast feast with with most most admired admired disorder, disorder, daisy.' daisy.' 'but 'but where where are are they they all, all, i i wonder!' wonder!' said said i. i. 'god 'god knows,' knows,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'after 'after strolling strolling to to the the ferry ferry looking looking for for you, i i strolled strolled in in here here and and found found the the place place deserted. deserted. that that set set me me thinking, thinking, and and you found found me me thinking.' thinking.' the the advent advent of of mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge with with a a basket, basket, explained explained how how the the house house had had happened happened to to be be empty. empty. she she had had hurried hurried out out to to buy buy something something that that was was needed, needed, against against mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's return return with with the the tide; tide; and and had had left left the the door door open open in in the the meanwhile, meanwhile, lest lest ham ham and and little little em'ly, em'ly, with with whom whom it it was was an an early early night, night, should should come come home home while while she she was was gone. gone. steerforth, steerforth, after after very very much much improving improving mrs. mrs. gummidge's gummidge's spirits spirits by by a a cheerful cheerful salutation salutation and and a a jocose jocose embrace, embrace, took took my my arm, arm, and and hurried hurried me me away. away. he he had had improved improved his his own own spirits, spirits, no no less less than than mrs. mrs. gummidge's, gummidge's, for for they they were were again again at at their their usual usual flow, flow, and and he he was was full full of of vivacious vivacious conversation conversation as as we we went went along. along. 'and 'and so,' so,' he he said, said, gaily, gaily, 'we 'we abandon abandon this this buccaneer buccaneer life life tomorrow, tomorrow, do do we?' we?' 'so 'so we we agreed,' agreed,' i i returned. returned. 'and 'and our our places places by by the the coach coach are are taken, taken, you know.' know.' 'ay! 'ay! there's there's no no help help for for it, it, i i suppose,' suppose,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i have have almost almost forgotten forgotten that that there there is is anything anything to to do do in in the the world world but but to to go go out out tossing tossing on on the the sea sea here. here. i i wish wish there there was was not.' not.' 'as 'as long long as as the the novelty novelty should should last,' last,' said said i, i, laughing. laughing. 'like 'like enough,' enough,' he he returned; returned; 'though 'though there's there's a a sarcastic sarcastic meaning meaning in in that that observation observation for for an an amiable amiable piece piece of of innocence innocence like like my my young young friend. friend. well! well! i i dare dare say say i i am am a a capricious capricious fellow, fellow, david. david. i i know know i i am; am; but but while while the the iron iron is is hot, hot, i i can can strike strike it it vigorously vigorously too. too. i i could could pass pass a a reasonably reasonably good good examination examination already, already, as as a a pilot pilot in in these these waters, waters, i i think.' think.' 'mr. 'mr. peggotty peggotty says says you are are a a wonder,' wonder,' i i returned. returned. 'a 'a nautical nautical phenomenon, phenomenon, eh?' eh?' laughed laughed steerforth. steerforth. 'indeed 'indeed he he does, does, and and you know know how how truly; truly; i i know know how how ardent ardent you are are in in any any pursuit pursuit you follow, follow, and and how how easily easily you can can master master it. it. and and that that amazes amazes me me most most in in you, steerforth steerforth -- -- that that you should should be be contented contented with with such such fitful fitful uses uses of of your your powers.' powers.' 'contented?' 'contented?' he he answered, answered, merrily. merrily. 'i 'i am am never never contented, contented, except except with with your your freshness, freshness, my my gentle gentle daisy. daisy. as as to to fitfulness, fitfulness, i i have have never never learnt learnt the the art art of of binding binding myself myself to to any any of of the the wheels wheels on on which which the the ixions ixions of of these these days days are are turning turning round round and and round. round. i i missed missed it it somehow somehow in in a a bad bad apprenticeship, apprenticeship, and and now now don't don't care care about about it. it. -- -- -you -you know know i i have have bought bought a a boat boat down down here?' here?' 'what 'what an an extraordinary extraordinary fellow fellow you are, are, steerforth!' steerforth!' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, stopping stopping -- -- for for this this was was the the first first i i had had heard heard of of it. it. 'when 'when you may may never never care care to to come come near near the the place place again!' again!' 'i 'i don't don't know know that,' that,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i have have taken taken a a fancy fancy to to the the place. place. at at all all events,' events,' walking walking me me briskly briskly on, on, 'i 'i have have bought bought a a boat boat that that was was for for sale sale -- -- a a clipper, clipper, mr. mr. peggotty peggotty says; says; and and so so she she is is -- -- and and mr. mr. peggotty peggotty will will be be master master of of her her in in my my absence.' absence.' 'now 'now i i understand understand you, steerforth!' steerforth!' said said i, i, exultingly. exultingly. 'you pretend pretend to to have have bought bought it it for for yourself, yourself, but but you have have really really done done so so to to confer confer a a benefit benefit on on him. him. i i might might have have known known as as much much at at first, first, knowing knowing you. my my dear dear kind kind steerforth, steerforth, how how can can i i tell tell you what what i i think think of of your your generosity?' generosity?' 'tush!' 'tush!' he he answered, answered, turning turning red. red. 'the 'the less less said, said, the the better.' better.' 'didn't 'didn't i i know?' know?' cried cried i, i, 'didn't 'didn't i i say say that that there there was was not not a a joy, joy, or or sorrow, sorrow, or or any any emotion emotion of of such such honest honest hearts hearts that that was was indifferent indifferent to to you?' 'aye, 'aye, aye,' aye,' he he answered, answered, 'you told told me me all all that. that. there there let let it it rest. rest. we we have have said said enough!' enough!' afraid afraid of of offending offending him him by by pursuing pursuing the the subject subject when when he he made made so so light light of of it, it, i i only only pursued pursued it it in in my my thoughts thoughts as as we we went went on on at at even even a a quicker quicker pace pace than than before. before. 'she 'she must must be be newly newly rigged,' rigged,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'and 'and i i shall shall leave leave littimer littimer behind behind to to see see it it done, done, that that i i may may know know she she is is quite quite complete. complete. did did i i tell tell you littimer littimer had had come come down?' down?' 'no.' 'no.' 'oh 'oh yes! yes! came came down down this this morning, morning, with with a a letter letter from from my my mother.' mother.' as as our our looks looks met, met, i i observed observed that that he he was was pale pale even even to to his his lips, lips, though though he he looked looked very very steadily steadily at at me. me. i i feared feared that that some some difference difference between between him him and and his his mother mother might might have have led led to to his his being being in in the the frame frame of of mind mind in in which which i i had had found found him him at at the the solitary solitary fireside. fireside. i i hinted hinted so. so. 'oh 'oh no!' no!' he he said, said, shaking shaking his his head, head, and and giving giving a a slight slight laugh. laugh. 'nothing 'nothing of of the the sort! sort! yes. yes. he he is is come come down, down, that that man man of of mine.' mine.' 'the 'the same same as as ever?' ever?' said said i. i. 'the 'the same same as as ever,' ever,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'distant 'distant and and quiet quiet as as the the north north pole. pole. he he shall shall see see to to the the boat boat being being fresh fresh named. named. she's she's the the "stormy "stormy petrel" petrel" now. now. what what does does mr. mr. peggotty peggotty care care for for stormy stormy petrels! petrels! i'll i'll have have her her christened christened again.' again.' 'by 'by what what name?' name?' i i asked. asked. 'the 'the "little "little em'ly".' em'ly".' as as he he had had continued continued to to look look steadily steadily at at me, me, i i took took it it as as a a reminder reminder that that he he objected objected to to being being extolled extolled for for his his consideration. consideration. i i could could not not help help showing showing in in my my face face how how much much it it pleased pleased me, me, but but i i said said little, little, and and he he resumed resumed his his usual usual smile, smile, and and seemed seemed relieved. relieved. 'but 'but see see here,' here,' he he said, said, looking looking before before us, us, 'where 'where the the original original little little em'ly em'ly comes! comes! and and that that fellow fellow with with her, her, eh? eh? upon upon my my soul, soul, he's he's a a true true knight. knight. he he never never leaves leaves her!' her!' ham ham was was a a boat-builder boat-builder in in these these days, days, having having improved improved a a natural natural ingenuity ingenuity in in that that handicraft, handicraft, until until he he had had become become a a skilled skilled workman. workman. he he was was in in his his working-dress, working-dress, and and looked looked rugged rugged enough, enough, but but manly manly withal, withal, and and a a very very fit fit protector protector for for the the blooming blooming little little creature creature at at his his side. side. indeed, indeed, there there was was a a frankness frankness in in his his face, face, an an honesty, honesty, and and an an undisguised undisguised show show of of his his pride pride in in her, her, and and his his love love for for her, her, which which were, were, to to me, me, the the best best of of good good looks. looks. i i thought, thought, as as they they came came towards towards us, us, that that they they were were well well matched matched even even in in that that particular. particular. she she withdrew withdrew her her hand hand timidly timidly from from his his arm arm as as we we stopped stopped to to speak speak to to them, them, and and blushed blushed as as she she gave gave it it to to steerforth steerforth and and to to me. me. when when they they passed passed on, on, after after we we had had exchanged exchanged a a few few words, words, she she did did not not like like to to replace replace that that hand, hand, but, but, still still appearing appearing timid timid and and constrained, constrained, walked walked by by herself. herself. i i thought thought all all this this very very pretty pretty and and engaging, engaging, and and steerforth steerforth seemed seemed to to think think so so too, too, as as we we looked looked after after them them fading fading away away in in the the light light of of a a young young moon. moon. suddenly suddenly there there passed passed us us -- -- evidently evidently following following them them -- -- a a young young woman woman whose whose approach approach we we had had not not observed, observed, but but whose whose face face i i saw saw as as she she went went by, by, and and thought thought i i had had a a faint faint remembrance remembrance of. of. she she was was lightly lightly dressed; dressed; looked looked bold, bold, and and haggard, haggard, and and flaunting, flaunting, and and poor; poor; but but seemed, seemed, for for the the time, time, to to have have given given all all that that to to the the wind wind which which was was blowing, blowing, and and to to have have nothing nothing in in her her mind mind but but going going after after them. them. as as the the dark dark distant distant level, level, absorbing absorbing their their figures figures into into itself, itself, left left but but itself itself visible visible between between us us and and the the sea sea and and clouds, clouds, her her figure figure disappeared disappeared in in like like manner, manner, still still no no nearer nearer to to them them than than before. before. 'that 'that is is a a black black shadow shadow to to be be following following the the girl,' girl,' said said steerforth, steerforth, standing standing still; still; 'what 'what does does it it mean?' mean?' he he spoke spoke in in a a low low voice voice that that sounded sounded almost almost strange strange to to me. me. 'she 'she must must have have it it in in her her mind mind to to beg beg of of them, them, i i think,' think,' said said i. i. 'a 'a beggar beggar would would be be no no novelty,' novelty,' said said steerforth; steerforth; 'but 'but it it is is a a strange strange thing thing that that the the beggar beggar should should take take that that shape shape tonight.' tonight.' 'why?' 'why?' i i asked. asked. 'for 'for no no better better reason, reason, truly, truly, than than because because i i was was thinking,' thinking,' he he said, said, after after a a pause, pause, 'of 'of something something like like it, it, when when it it came came by. by. where where the the devil devil did did it it come come from, from, i i wonder!' wonder!' 'from 'from the the shadow shadow of of this this wall, wall, i i think,' think,' said said i, i, as as we we emerged emerged upon upon a a road road on on which which a a wall wall abutted. abutted. 'it's 'it's gone!' gone!' he he returned, returned, looking looking over over his his shoulder. shoulder. 'and 'and all all ill ill go go with with it. it. now now for for our our dinner!' dinner!' but but he he looked looked again again over over his his shoulder shoulder towards towards the the sea-line sea-line glimmering glimmering afar afar off, off, and and yet yet again. again. and and he he wondered wondered about about it, it, in in some some broken broken expressions, expressions, several several times, times, in in the the short short remainder remainder of of our our walk; walk; and and only only seemed seemed to to forget forget it it when when the the light light of of fire fire and and candle candle shone shone upon upon us, us, seated seated warm warm and and merry, merry, at at table. table. littimer littimer was was there, there, and and had had his his usual usual effect effect upon upon me. me. when when i i said said to to him him that that i i hoped hoped mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth and and miss miss dartle dartle were were well, well, he he answered answered respectfully respectfully (and (and of of course course respectably), respectably), that that they they were were tolerably tolerably well, well, he he thanked thanked me, me, and and had had sent sent their their compliments. compliments. this this was was all, all, and and yet yet he he seemed seemed to to me me to to say say as as plainly plainly as as a a man man could could say: say: 'you are are very very young, young, sir; sir; you are are exceedingly exceedingly young.' young.' we we had had almost almost finished finished dinner, dinner, when when taking taking a a step step or or two two towards towards the the table, table, from from the the corner corner where where he he kept kept watch watch upon upon us, us, or or rather rather upon upon me, me, as as i i felt, felt, he he said said to to his his master: master: 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir. sir. miss miss mowcher mowcher is is down down here.' here.' 'who?' 'who?' cried cried steerforth, steerforth, much much astonished. astonished. 'miss 'miss mowcher, mowcher, sir.' sir.' 'why, 'why, what what on on earth earth does does she she do do here?' here?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'it 'it appears appears to to be be her her native native part part of of the the country, country, sir. sir. she she informs informs me me that that she she makes makes one one of of her her professional professional visits visits here, here, every every year, year, sir. sir. i i met met her her in in the the street street this this afternoon, afternoon, and and she she wished wished to to know know if if she she might might have have the the honour honour of of waiting waiting on on you after after dinner, dinner, sir.' sir.' 'do 'do you know know the the giantess giantess in in question, question, daisy?' daisy?' inquired inquired steerforth. steerforth. i i was was obliged obliged to to confess confess -- -- i i felt felt ashamed, ashamed, even even of of being being at at this this disadvantage disadvantage before before littimer littimer -- -- that that miss miss mowcher mowcher and and i i were were wholly wholly unacquainted. unacquainted. 'then 'then you shall shall know know her,' her,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'for 'for she she is is one one of of the the seven seven wonders wonders of of the the world. world. when when miss miss mowcher mowcher comes, comes, show show her her in.' in.' i i felt felt some some curiosity curiosity and and excitement excitement about about this this lady, lady, especially especially as as steerforth steerforth burst burst into into a a fit fit of of laughing laughing when when i i referred referred to to her, her, and and positively positively refused refused to to answer answer any any question question of of which which i i made made her her the the subject. subject. i i remained, remained, therefore, therefore, in in a a state state of of considerable considerable expectation expectation until until the the cloth cloth had had been been removed removed some some half half an an hour, hour, and and we we were were sitting sitting over over our our decanter decanter of of wine wine before before the the fire, fire, when when the the door door opened, opened, and and littimer, littimer, with with his his habitual habitual serenity serenity quite quite undisturbed, undisturbed, announced: announced: 'miss 'miss mowcher!' mowcher!' i i looked looked at at the the doorway doorway and and saw saw nothing. nothing. i i was was still still looking looking at at the the doorway, doorway, thinking thinking that that miss miss mowcher mowcher was was a a long long while while making making her her appearance, appearance, when, when, to to my my infinite infinite astonishment, astonishment, there there came came waddling waddling round round a a sofa sofa which which stood stood between between me me and and it, it, a a pursy pursy dwarf, dwarf, of of about about forty forty or or forty-five, forty-five, with with a a very very large large head head and and face, face, a a pair pair of of roguish roguish grey grey eyes, eyes, and and such such extremely extremely little little arms, arms, that, that, to to enable enable herself herself to to lay lay a a finger finger archly archly against against her her snub snub nose, nose, as as she she ogled ogled steerforth, steerforth, she she was was obliged obliged to to meet meet the the finger finger half-way, half-way, and and lay lay her her nose nose against against it. it. her her chin, chin, which which was was what what is is called called a a double double chin, chin, was was so so fat fat that that it it entirely entirely swallowed swallowed up up the the strings strings of of her her bonnet, bonnet, bow bow and and all. all. throat throat she she had had none; none; waist waist she she had had none; none; legs legs she she had had none, none, worth worth mentioning; mentioning; for for though though she she was was more more than than full-sized full-sized down down to to where where her her waist waist would would have have been, been, if if she she had had had had any, any, and and though though she she terminated, terminated, as as human human beings beings generally generally do, do, in in a a pair pair of of feet, feet, she she was was so so short short that that she she stood stood at at a a common-sized common-sized chair chair as as at at a a table, table, resting resting a a bag bag she she carried carried on on the the seat. seat. this this lady lady -- -- dressed dressed in in an an off-hand, off-hand, easy easy style; style; bringing bringing her her nose nose and and her her forefinger forefinger together, together, with with the the difficulty difficulty i i have have described; described; standing standing with with her her head head necessarily necessarily on on one one side, side, and, and, with with one one of of her her sharp sharp eyes eyes shut shut up, up, making making an an uncommonly uncommonly knowing knowing face face -- -- after after ogling ogling steerforth steerforth for for a a few few moments, moments, broke broke into into a a torrent torrent of of words. words. 'what! 'what! my my flower!' flower!' she she pleasantly pleasantly began, began, shaking shaking her her large large head head at at him. him. 'you're 'you're there, there, are are you! oh, oh, you naughty naughty boy, boy, fie fie for for shame, shame, what what do do you do do so so far far away away from from home? home? up up to to mischief, mischief, i'll i'll be be bound. bound. oh, oh, you're you're a a downy downy fellow, fellow, steerforth, steerforth, so so you are, are, and and i'm i'm another, another, ain't ain't i? i? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! ha! you'd you'd have have betted betted a a hundred hundred pound pound to to five, five, now, now, that that you wouldn't wouldn't have have seen seen me me here, here, wouldn't wouldn't you? bless bless you, man man alive, alive, i'm i'm everywhere. everywhere. i'm i'm here here and and there, there, and and where where not, not, like like the the conjurer's conjurer's half-crown half-crown in in the the lady's lady's handkercher. handkercher. talking talking of of handkerchers handkerchers -- -- and and talking talking of of ladies ladies -- -- what what a a comfort comfort you are are to to your your blessed blessed mother, mother, ain't ain't you, my my dear dear boy, boy, over over one one of of my my shoulders, shoulders, and and i i don't don't say say which!' which!' miss miss mowcher mowcher untied untied her her bonnet, bonnet, at at this this passage passage of of her her discourse, discourse, threw threw back back the the strings, strings, and and sat sat down, down, panting, panting, on on a a footstool footstool in in front front of of the the fire fire -- -- making making a a kind kind of of arbour arbour of of the the dining dining table, table, which which spread spread its its mahogany mahogany shelter shelter above above her her head. head. 'oh 'oh my my stars stars and and what's-their-names!' what's-their-names!' she she went went on, on, clapping clapping a a hand hand on on each each of of her her little little knees, knees, and and glancing glancing shrewdly shrewdly at at me, me, 'i'm 'i'm of of too too full full a a habit, habit, that's that's the the fact, fact, steerforth. steerforth. after after a a flight flight of of stairs, stairs, it it gives gives me me as as much much trouble trouble to to draw draw every every breath breath i i want, want, as as if if it it was was a a bucket bucket of of water. water. if if you saw saw me me looking looking out out of of an an upper upper window, window, you'd you'd think think i i was was a a fine fine woman, woman, wouldn't wouldn't you?' 'i 'i should should think think that, that, wherever wherever i i saw saw you,' replied replied steerforth. steerforth. 'go 'go along, along, you dog, dog, do!' do!' cried cried the the little little creature, creature, making making a a whisk whisk at at him him with with the the handkerchief handkerchief with with which which she she was was wiping wiping her her face, face, 'and 'and don't don't be be impudent! impudent! but but i i give give you my my word word and and honour honour i i was was at at lady lady mithers's mithers's last last week week -- -- there's there's a a woman! woman! how how she she wears! wears! -- -- and and mithers mithers himself himself came came into into the the room room where where i i was was waiting waiting for for her her -- -- there's there's a a man! man! how how he he wears! wears! and and his his wig wig too, too, for for he's he's had had it it these these ten ten years years -- -- and and he he went went on on at at that that rate rate in in the the complimentary complimentary line, line, that that i i began began to to think think i i should should be be obliged obliged to to ring ring the the bell. bell. ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! he's he's a a pleasant pleasant wretch, wretch, but but he he wants wants principle.' principle.' 'what 'what were were you doing doing for for lady lady mithers?' mithers?' asked asked steerforth. steerforth. 'that's 'that's tellings, tellings, my my blessed blessed infant,' infant,' she she retorted, retorted, tapping tapping her her nose nose again, again, screwing screwing up up her her face, face, and and twinkling twinkling her her eyes eyes like like an an imp imp of of supernatural supernatural intelligence. intelligence. 'never 'never you mind! mind! you'd you'd like like to to know know whether whether i i stop stop her her hair hair from from falling falling off, off, or or dye dye it, it, or or touch touch up up her her complexion, complexion, or or improve improve her her eyebrows, eyebrows, wouldn't wouldn't you? and and so so you shall, shall, my my darling darling -- -- when when i i tell tell you! do do you know know what what my my great great grandfather's grandfather's name name was?' was?' 'no,' 'no,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'it 'it was was walker, walker, my my sweet sweet pet,' pet,' replied replied miss miss mowcher, mowcher, 'and 'and he he came came of of a a long long line line of of walkers, walkers, that that i i inherit inherit all all the the hookey hookey estates estates from.' from.' i i never never beheld beheld anything anything approaching approaching to to miss miss mowcher's mowcher's wink wink except except miss miss mowcher's mowcher's self-possession. self-possession. she she had had a a wonderful wonderful way way too, too, when when listening listening to to what what was was said said to to her, her, or or when when waiting waiting for for an an answer answer to to what what she she had had said said herself, herself, of of pausing pausing with with her her head head cunningly cunningly on on one one side, side, and and one one eye eye turned turned up up like like a a magpie's. magpie's. altogether altogether i i was was lost lost in in amazement, amazement, and and sat sat staring staring at at her, her, quite quite oblivious, oblivious, i i am am afraid, afraid, of of the the laws laws of of politeness. politeness. she she had had by by this this time time drawn drawn the the chair chair to to her her side, side, and and was was busily busily engaged engaged in in producing producing from from the the bag bag (plunging (plunging in in her her short short arm arm to to the the shoulder, shoulder, at at every every dive) dive) a a number number of of small small bottles, bottles, sponges, sponges, combs, combs, brushes, brushes, bits bits of of flannel, flannel, little little pairs pairs of of curling-irons, curling-irons, and and other other instruments, instruments, which which she she tumbled tumbled in in a a heap heap upon upon the the chair. chair. from from this this employment employment she she suddenly suddenly desisted, desisted, and and said said to to steerforth, steerforth, much much to to my my confusion: confusion: 'who's 'who's your your friend?' friend?' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said steerforth; steerforth; 'he 'he wants wants to to know know you.' 'well, 'well, then, then, he he shall! shall! i i thought thought he he looked looked as as if if he he did!' did!' returned returned miss miss mowcher, mowcher, waddling waddling up up to to me, me, bag bag in in hand, hand, and and laughing laughing on on me me as as she she came. came. 'face 'face like like a a peach!' peach!' standing standing on on tiptoe tiptoe to to pinch pinch my my cheek cheek as as i i sat. sat. 'quite 'quite tempting! tempting! i'm i'm very very fond fond of of peaches. peaches. happy happy to to make make your your acquaintance, acquaintance, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i'm i'm sure.' sure.' i i said said that that i i congratulated congratulated myself myself on on having having the the honour honour to to make make hers, hers, and and that that the the happiness happiness was was mutual. mutual. 'oh, 'oh, my my goodness, goodness, how how polite polite we we are!' are!' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss mowcher, mowcher, making making a a preposterous preposterous attempt attempt to to cover cover her her large large face face with with her her morsel morsel of of a a hand. hand. 'what 'what a a world world of of gammon gammon and and spinnage spinnage it it is, is, though, though, ain't ain't it!' it!' this this was was addressed addressed confidentially confidentially to to both both of of us, us, as as the the morsel morsel of of a a hand hand came came away away from from the the face, face, and and buried buried itself, itself, arm arm and and all, all, in in the the bag bag again. again. 'what 'what do do you mean, mean, miss miss mowcher?' mowcher?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'ha! 'ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! what what a a refreshing refreshing set set of of humbugs humbugs we we are, are, to to be be sure, sure, ain't ain't we, we, my my sweet sweet child?' child?' replied replied that that morsel morsel of of a a woman, woman, feeling feeling in in the the bag bag with with her her head head on on one one side side and and her her eye eye in in the the air. air. 'look 'look here!' here!' taking taking something something out. out. 'scraps 'scraps of of the the russian russian prince's prince's nails. nails. prince prince alphabet alphabet turned turned topsy-turvy, topsy-turvy, i i call call him, him, for for his his name's name's got got all all the the letters letters in in it, it, higgledy-piggledy.' higgledy-piggledy.' 'the 'the russian russian prince prince is is a a client client of of yours, yours, is is he?' he?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i believe believe you, my my pet,' pet,' replied replied miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'i 'i keep keep his his nails nails in in order order for for him. him. twice twice a a week! week! fingers fingers and and toes.' toes.' 'he 'he pays pays well, well, i i hope?' hope?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'pays, 'pays, as as he he speaks, speaks, my my dear dear child child -- -- through through the the nose,' nose,' replied replied miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'none 'none of of your your close close shavers shavers the the prince prince ain't. ain't. you'd you'd say say so, so, if if you saw saw his his moustachios. moustachios. red red by by nature, nature, black black by by art.' art.' 'by 'by your your art, art, of of course,' course,' said said steerforth. steerforth. miss miss mowcher mowcher winked winked assent. assent. 'forced 'forced to to send send for for me. me. couldn't couldn't help help it. it. the the climate climate affected affected his his dye; dye; it it did did very very well well in in russia, russia, but but it it was was no no go go here. here. you never never saw saw such such a a rusty rusty prince prince in in all all your your born born days days as as he he was. was. like like old old iron!' iron!' 'is 'is that that why why you called called him him a a humbug, humbug, just just now?' now?' inquired inquired steerforth. steerforth. 'oh, 'oh, you're you're a a broth broth of of a a boy, boy, ain't ain't you?' returned returned miss miss mowcher, mowcher, shaking shaking her her head head violently. violently. 'i 'i said, said, what what a a set set of of humbugs humbugs we we were were in in general, general, and and i i showed showed you the the scraps scraps of of the the prince's prince's nails nails to to prove prove it. it. the the prince's prince's nails nails do do more more for for me me in in private private families families of of the the genteel genteel sort, sort, than than all all my my talents talents put put together. together. i i always always carry carry 'em 'em about. about. they're they're the the best best introduction. introduction. if if miss miss mowcher mowcher cuts cuts the the prince's prince's nails, nails, she she must must be be all all right. right. i i give give 'em 'em away away to to the the young young ladies. ladies. they they put put 'em 'em in in albums, albums, i i believe. believe. ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! upon upon my my life, life, "the "the whole whole social social system" system" (as (as the the men men call call it it when when they they make make speeches speeches in in parliament) parliament) is is a a system system of of prince's prince's nails!' nails!' said said this this least least of of women, women, trying trying to to fold fold her her short short arms, arms, and and nodding nodding her her large large head. head. steerforth steerforth laughed laughed heartily, heartily, and and i i laughed laughed too. too. miss miss mowcher mowcher continuing continuing all all the the time time to to shake shake her her head head (which (which was was very very much much on on one one side), side), and and to to look look into into the the air air with with one one eye, eye, and and to to wink wink with with the the other. other. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' she she said, said, smiting smiting her her small small knees, knees, and and rising, rising, 'this 'this is is not not business. business. come, come, steerforth, steerforth, let's let's explore explore the the polar polar regions, regions, and and have have it it over.' over.' she she then then selected selected two two or or three three of of the the little little instruments, instruments, and and a a little little bottle, bottle, and and asked asked (to (to my my surprise) surprise) if if the the table table would would bear. bear. on on steerforth's steerforth's replying replying in in the the affirmative, affirmative, she she pushed pushed a a chair chair against against it, it, and and begging begging the the assistance assistance of of my my hand, hand, mounted mounted up, up, pretty pretty nimbly, nimbly, to to the the top, top, as as if if it it were were a a stage. stage. 'if 'if either either of of you saw saw my my ankles,' ankles,' she she said, said, when when she she was was safely safely elevated, elevated, 'say 'say so, so, and and i'll i'll go go home home and and destroy destroy myself!' myself!' 'i 'i did did not,' not,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i did did not,' not,' said said i. i. 'well 'well then,' then,' cried cried miss miss mowcher,' mowcher,' i'll i'll consent consent to to live. live. now, now, ducky, ducky, ducky, ducky, ducky, ducky, come come to to mrs. mrs. bond bond and and be be killed.' killed.' this this was was an an invocation invocation to to steerforth steerforth to to place place himself himself under under her her hands; hands; who, who, accordingly, accordingly, sat sat himself himself down, down, with with his his back back to to the the table, table, and and his his laughing laughing face face towards towards me, me, and and submitted submitted his his head head to to her her inspection, inspection, evidently evidently for for no no other other purpose purpose than than our our entertainment. entertainment. to to see see miss miss mowcher mowcher standing standing over over him, him, looking looking at at his his rich rich profusion profusion of of brown brown hair hair through through a a large large round round magnifying magnifying glass, glass, which which she she took took out out of of her her pocket, pocket, was was a a most most amazing amazing spectacle. spectacle. 'you're 'you're a a pretty pretty fellow!' fellow!' said said miss miss mowcher, mowcher, after after a a brief brief inspection. inspection. 'you'd 'you'd be be as as bald bald as as a a friar friar on on the the top top of of your your head head in in twelve twelve months, months, but but for for me. me. just just half half a a minute, minute, my my young young friend, friend, and and we'll we'll give give you a a polishing polishing that that shall shall keep keep your your curls curls on on for for the the next next ten ten years!' years!' with with this, this, she she tilted tilted some some of of the the contents contents of of the the little little bottle bottle on on to to one one of of the the little little bits bits of of flannel, flannel, and, and, again again imparting imparting some some of of the the virtues virtues of of that that preparation preparation to to one one of of the the little little brushes, brushes, began began rubbing rubbing and and scraping scraping away away with with both both on on the the crown crown of of steerforth's steerforth's head head in in the the busiest busiest manner manner i i ever ever witnessed, witnessed, talking talking all all the the time. time. 'there's 'there's charley charley pyegrave, pyegrave, the the duke's duke's son,' son,' she she said. said. 'you know know charley?' charley?' peeping peeping round round into into his his face. face. 'a 'a little,' little,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'what 'what a a man man he he is! is! there's there's a a whisker! whisker! as as to to charley's charley's legs, legs, if if they they were were only only a a pair pair (which (which they they ain't), ain't), they'd they'd defy defy competition. competition. would would you believe believe he he tried tried to to do do without without me me -- -- in in the the life-guards, life-guards, too?' too?' 'mad!' 'mad!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'it 'it looks looks like like it. it. however, however, mad mad or or sane, sane, he he tried,' tried,' returned returned miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'what 'what does does he he do, do, but, but, lo lo and and behold behold you, he he goes goes into into a a perfumer's perfumer's shop, shop, and and wants wants to to buy buy a a bottle bottle of of the the madagascar madagascar liquid.' liquid.' 'charley 'charley does?' does?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'charley 'charley does. does. but but they they haven't haven't got got any any of of the the madagascar madagascar liquid.' liquid.' 'what 'what is is it? it? something something to to drink?' drink?' asked asked steerforth. steerforth. 'to 'to drink?' drink?' returned returned miss miss mowcher, mowcher, stopping stopping to to slap slap his his cheek. cheek. 'to 'to doctor doctor his his own own moustachios moustachios with, with, you know. know. there there was was a a woman woman in in the the shop shop -- -- elderly elderly female female -- -- quite quite a a griffin griffin -- -- who who had had never never even even heard heard of of it it by by name. name. "begging "begging pardon, pardon, sir," sir," said said the the griffin griffin to to charley, charley, "it's "it's not not -- -- not not -- -- not not rouge, rouge, is is it?" it?" "rouge," "rouge," said said charley charley to to the the griffin. griffin. "what "what the the unmentionable unmentionable to to ears ears polite, polite, do do you think think i i want want with with rouge?" rouge?" "no "no offence, offence, sir," sir," said said the the griffin; griffin; "we "we have have it it asked asked for for by by so so many many names, names, i i thought thought it it might might be." be." now now that, that, my my child,' child,' continued continued miss miss mowcher, mowcher, rubbing rubbing all all the the time time as as busily busily as as ever, ever, 'is 'is another another instance instance of of the the refreshing refreshing humbug humbug i i was was speaking speaking of. of. i i do do something something in in that that way way myself myself -- -- perhaps perhaps a a good good deal deal -- -- perhaps perhaps a a little little -- -- sharp's sharp's the the word, word, my my dear dear boy boy -- -- never never mind!' mind!' 'in 'in what what way way do do you mean? mean? in in the the rouge rouge way?' way?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'put 'put this this and and that that together, together, my my tender tender pupil,' pupil,' returned returned the the wary wary mowcher, mowcher, touching touching her her nose, nose, 'work 'work it it by by the the rule rule of of secrets secrets in in all all trades, trades, and and the the product product will will give give you the the desired desired result. result. i i say say i i do do a a little little in in that that way way myself. myself. one one dowager, dowager, she she calls calls it it lip-salve. lip-salve. another, another, she she calls calls it it gloves. gloves. another, another, she she calls calls it it tucker-edging. tucker-edging. another, another, she she calls calls it it a a fan. fan. i i call call it it whatever whatever they they call call it. it. i i supply supply it it for for 'em, 'em, but but we we keep keep up up the the trick trick so, so, to to one one another, another, and and make make believe believe with with such such a a face, face, that that they'd they'd as as soon soon think think of of laying laying it it on, on, before before a a whole whole drawing-room, drawing-room, as as before before me. me. and and when when i i wait wait upon upon 'em, 'em, they'll they'll say say to to me me sometimes sometimes -- -- with with it it on on -- -- thick, thick, and and no no mistake mistake -- -- "how "how am am i i looking, looking, mowcher? mowcher? am am i i pale?" pale?" ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! isn't isn't that that refreshing, refreshing, my my young young friend!' friend!' i i never never did did in in my my days days behold behold anything anything like like mowcher mowcher as as she she stood stood upon upon the the dining dining table, table, intensely intensely enjoying enjoying this this refreshment, refreshment, rubbing rubbing busily busily at at steerforth's steerforth's head, head, and and winking winking at at me me over over it. it. 'ah!' 'ah!' she she said. said. 'such 'such things things are are not not much much in in demand demand hereabouts. hereabouts. that that sets sets me me off off again! again! i i haven't haven't seen seen a a pretty pretty woman woman since since i've i've been been here, here, jemmy.' jemmy.' 'no?' 'no?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'not 'not the the ghost ghost of of one,' one,' replied replied miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'we 'we could could show show her her the the substance substance of of one, one, i i think?' think?' said said steerforth, steerforth, addressing addressing his his eyes eyes to to mine. mine. 'eh, 'eh, daisy?' daisy?' 'yes, 'yes, indeed,' indeed,' said said i. i. 'aha?' 'aha?' cried cried the the little little creature, creature, glancing glancing sharply sharply at at my my face, face, and and then then peeping peeping round round at at steerforth's. steerforth's. 'umph?' 'umph?' the the first first exclamation exclamation sounded sounded like like a a question question put put to to both both of of us, us, and and the the second second like like a a question question put put to to steerforth steerforth only. only. she she seemed seemed to to have have found found no no answer answer to to either, either, but but continued continued to to rub, rub, with with her her head head on on one one side side and and her her eye eye turned turned up, up, as as if if she she were were looking looking for for an an answer answer in in the the air air and and were were confident confident of of its its appearing appearing presently. presently. 'a 'a sister sister of of yours, yours, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' she she cried, cried, after after a a pause, pause, and and still still keeping keeping the the same same look-out. look-out. 'aye, 'aye, aye?' aye?' 'no,' 'no,' said said steerforth, steerforth, before before i i could could reply. reply. 'nothing 'nothing of of the the sort. sort. on on the the contrary, contrary, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield used used -- -- or or i i am am much much mistaken mistaken -- -- to to have have a a great great admiration admiration for for her.' her.' 'why, 'why, hasn't hasn't he he now?' now?' returned returned miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'is 'is he he fickle? fickle? oh, oh, for for shame! shame! did did he he sip sip every every flower, flower, and and change change every every hour, hour, until until polly polly his his passion passion requited? requited? -- -- is is her her name name polly?' polly?' the the elfin elfin suddenness suddenness with with which which she she pounced pounced upon upon me me with with this this question, question, and and a a searching searching look, look, quite quite disconcerted disconcerted me me for for a a moment. moment. 'no, 'no, miss miss mowcher,' mowcher,' i i replied. replied. 'her 'her name name is is emily.' emily.' 'aha?' 'aha?' she she cried cried exactly exactly as as before. before. 'umph? 'umph? what what a a rattle rattle i i am! am! mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, ain't ain't i i volatile?' volatile?' her her tone tone and and look look implied implied something something that that was was not not agreeable agreeable to to me me in in connexion connexion with with the the subject. subject. so so i i said, said, in in a a graver graver manner manner than than any any of of us us had had yet yet assumed: assumed: 'she 'she is is as as virtuous virtuous as as she she is is pretty. pretty. she she is is engaged engaged to to be be married married to to a a most most worthy worthy and and deserving deserving man man in in her her own own station station of of life. life. i i esteem esteem her her for for her her good good sense, sense, as as much much as as i i admire admire her her for for her her good good looks.' looks.' 'well 'well said!' said!' cried cried steerforth. steerforth. 'hear, 'hear, hear, hear, hear! hear! now now i'll i'll quench quench the the curiosity curiosity of of this this little little fatima, fatima, my my dear dear daisy, daisy, by by leaving leaving her her nothing nothing to to guess guess at. at. she she is is at at present present apprenticed, apprenticed, miss miss mowcher, mowcher, or or articled, articled, or or whatever whatever it it may may be, be, to to omer omer and and joram, joram, haberdashers, haberdashers, milliners, milliners, and and so so forth, forth, in in this this town. town. do do you observe? observe? omer omer and and joram. joram. the the promise promise of of which which my my friend friend has has spoken, spoken, is is made made and and entered entered into into with with her her cousin; cousin; christian christian name, name, ham; ham; surname, surname, peggotty; peggotty; occupation, occupation, boat-builder; boat-builder; also also of of this this town. town. she she lives lives with with a a relative; relative; christian christian name, name, unknown; unknown; surname, surname, peggotty; peggotty; occupation, occupation, seafaring; seafaring; also also of of this this town. town. she she is is the the prettiest prettiest and and most most engaging engaging little little fairy fairy in in the the world. world. i i admire admire her her -- -- as as my my friend friend does does -- -- exceedingly. exceedingly. if if it it were were not not that that i i might might appear appear to to disparage disparage her her intended, intended, which which i i know know my my friend friend would would not not like, like, i i would would add, add, that that to to me me she she seems seems to to be be throwing throwing herself herself away; away; that that i i am am sure sure she she might might do do better; better; and and that that i i swear swear she she was was born born to to be be a a lady.' lady.' miss miss mowcher mowcher listened listened to to these these words, words, which which were were very very slowly slowly and and distinctly distinctly spoken, spoken, with with her her head head on on one one side, side, and and her her eye eye in in the the air air as as if if she she were were still still looking looking for for that that answer. answer. when when he he ceased ceased she she became became brisk brisk again again in in an an instant, instant, and and rattled rattled away away with with surprising surprising volubility. volubility. 'oh! 'oh! and and that's that's all all about about it, it, is is it?' it?' she she exclaimed, exclaimed, trimming trimming his his whiskers whiskers with with a a little little restless restless pair pair of of scissors, scissors, that that went went glancing glancing round round his his head head in in all all directions. directions. 'very 'very well: well: very very well! well! quite quite a a long long story. story. ought ought to to end end "and "and they they lived lived happy happy ever ever afterwards"; afterwards"; oughtn't oughtn't it? it? ah! ah! what's what's that that game game at at forfeits? forfeits? i i love love my my love love with with an an e, e, because because she's she's enticing; enticing; i i hate hate her her with with an an e, e, because because she's she's engaged. engaged. i i took took her her to to the the sign sign of of the the exquisite, exquisite, and and treated treated her her with with an an elopement, elopement, her her name's name's emily, emily, and and she she lives lives in in the the east? east? ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, ain't ain't i i volatile?' volatile?' merely merely looking looking at at me me with with extravagant extravagant slyness, slyness, and and not not waiting waiting for for any any reply, reply, she she continued, continued, without without drawing drawing breath: breath: 'there! 'there! if if ever ever any any scapegrace scapegrace was was trimmed trimmed and and touched touched up up to to perfection, perfection, you are, are, steerforth. steerforth. if if i i understand understand any any noddle noddle in in the the world, world, i i understand understand yours. yours. do do you hear hear me me when when i i tell tell you that, that, my my darling? darling? i i understand understand yours,' yours,' peeping peeping down down into into his his face. face. 'now 'now you may may mizzle, mizzle, jemmy jemmy (as (as we we say say at at court), court), and and if if mr. mr. copperfield copperfield will will take take the the chair chair i'll i'll operate operate on on him.' him.' 'what 'what do do you say, say, daisy?' daisy?' inquired inquired steerforth, steerforth, laughing, laughing, and and resigning resigning his his seat. seat. 'will 'will you be be improved?' improved?' 'thank 'thank you, miss miss mowcher, mowcher, not not this this evening.' evening.' 'don't 'don't say say no,' no,' returned returned the the little little woman, woman, looking looking at at me me with with the the aspect aspect of of a a connoisseur; connoisseur; 'a 'a little little bit bit more more eyebrow?' eyebrow?' 'thank 'thank you,' i i returned, returned, 'some 'some other other time.' time.' 'have 'have it it carried carried half half a a quarter quarter of of an an inch inch towards towards the the temple,' temple,' said said miss miss mowcher. mowcher. 'we 'we can can do do it it in in a a fortnight.' fortnight.' 'no, 'no, i i thank thank you. not not at at present.' present.' 'go 'go in in for for a a tip,' tip,' she she urged. urged. 'no? 'no? let's let's get get the the scaffolding scaffolding up, up, then, then, for for a a pair pair of of whiskers. whiskers. come!' come!' i i could could not not help help blushing blushing as as i i declined, declined, for for i i felt felt we we were were on on my my weak weak point, point, now. now. but but miss miss mowcher, mowcher, finding finding that that i i was was not not at at present present disposed disposed for for any any decoration decoration within within the the range range of of her her art, art, and and that that i i was, was, for for the the time time being, being, proof proof against against the the blandishments blandishments of of the the small small bottle bottle which which she she held held up up before before one one eye eye to to enforce enforce her her persuasions, persuasions, said said we we would would make make a a beginning beginning on on an an early early day, day, and and requested requested the the aid aid of of my my hand hand to to descend descend from from her her elevated elevated station. station. thus thus assisted, assisted, she she skipped skipped down down with with much much agility, agility, and and began began to to tie tie her her double double chin chin into into her her bonnet. bonnet. 'the 'the fee,' fee,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'is 'is -- -- ' ' 'five 'five bob,' bob,' replied replied miss miss mowcher, mowcher, 'and 'and dirt dirt cheap, cheap, my my chicken. chicken. ain't ain't i i volatile, volatile, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' i i replied replied politely: politely: 'not 'not at at all.' all.' but but i i thought thought she she was was rather rather so, so, when when she she tossed tossed up up his his two two half-crowns half-crowns like like a a goblin goblin pieman, pieman, caught caught them, them, dropped dropped them them in in her her pocket, pocket, and and gave gave it it a a loud loud slap. slap. 'that's 'that's the the till!' till!' observed observed miss miss mowcher, mowcher, standing standing at at the the chair chair again, again, and and replacing replacing in in the the bag bag a a miscellaneous miscellaneous collection collection of of little little objects objects she she had had emptied emptied out out of of it. it. 'have 'have i i got got all all my my traps? traps? it it seems seems so. so. it it won't won't do do to to be be like like long long ned ned beadwood, beadwood, when when they they took took him him to to church church "to "to marry marry him him to to somebody", somebody", as as he he says, says, and and left left the the bride bride behind. behind. ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! a a wicked wicked rascal, rascal, ned, ned, but but droll! droll! now, now, i i know know i'm i'm going going to to break break your your hearts, hearts, but but i i am am forced forced to to leave leave you. you must must call call up up all all your your fortitude, fortitude, and and try try to to bear bear it. it. good-bye, good-bye, mr. mr. copperfield! copperfield! take take care care of of yourself, yourself, jockey jockey of of norfolk! norfolk! how how i i have have been been rattling rattling on! on! it's it's all all the the fault fault of of you two two wretches. wretches. i i forgive forgive you! "bob "bob swore!" swore!" -- -- as as the the englishman englishman said said for for "good "good night", night", when when he he first first learnt learnt french, french, and and thought thought it it so so like like english. english. "bob "bob swore," swore," my my ducks!' ducks!' with with the the bag bag slung slung over over her her arm, arm, and and rattling rattling as as she she waddled waddled away, away, she she waddled waddled to to the the door, door, where where she she stopped stopped to to inquire inquire if if she she should should leave leave us us a a lock lock of of her her hair. hair. 'ain't 'ain't i i volatile?' volatile?' she she added, added, as as a a commentary commentary on on this this offer, offer, and, and, with with her her finger finger on on her her nose, nose, departed. departed. steerforth steerforth laughed laughed to to that that degree, degree, that that it it was was impossible impossible for for me me to to help help laughing laughing too; too; though though i i am am not not sure sure i i should should have have done done so, so, but but for for this this inducement. inducement. when when we we had had had had our our laugh laugh quite quite out, out, which which was was after after some some time, time, he he told told me me that that miss miss mowcher mowcher had had quite quite an an extensive extensive connexion, connexion, and and made made herself herself useful useful to to a a variety variety of of people people in in a a variety variety of of ways. ways. some some people people trifled trifled with with her her as as a a mere mere oddity, oddity, he he said; said; but but she she was was as as shrewdly shrewdly and and sharply sharply observant observant as as anyone anyone he he knew, knew, and and as as long-headed long-headed as as she she was was short-armed. short-armed. he he told told me me that that what what she she had had said said of of being being here, here, and and there, there, and and everywhere, everywhere, was was true true enough; enough; for for she she made made little little darts darts into into the the provinces, provinces, and and seemed seemed to to pick pick up up customers customers everywhere, everywhere, and and to to know know everybody. everybody. i i asked asked him him what what her her disposition disposition was: was: whether whether it it was was at at all all mischievous, mischievous, and and if if her her sympathies sympathies were were generally generally on on the the right right side side of of things: things: but, but, not not succeeding succeeding in in attracting attracting his his attention attention to to these these questions questions after after two two or or three three attempts, attempts, i i forbore forbore or or forgot forgot to to repeat repeat them. them. he he told told me me instead, instead, with with much much rapidity, rapidity, a a good good deal deal about about her her skill, skill, and and her her profits; profits; and and about about her her being being a a scientific scientific cupper, cupper, if if i i should should ever ever have have occasion occasion for for her her service service in in that that capacity. capacity. she she was was the the principal principal theme theme of of our our conversation conversation during during the the evening: evening: and and when when we we parted parted for for the the night night steerforth steerforth called called after after me me over over the the banisters, banisters, 'bob 'bob swore!' swore!' as as i i went went downstairs. downstairs. i i was was surprised, surprised, when when i i came came to to mr. mr. barkis's barkis's house, house, to to find find ham ham walking walking up up and and down down in in front front of of it, it, and and still still more more surprised surprised to to learn learn from from him him that that little little em'ly em'ly was was inside. inside. i i naturally naturally inquired inquired why why he he was was not not there there too, too, instead instead of of pacing pacing the the streets streets by by himself? himself? 'why, 'why, you see, see, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he rejoined, rejoined, in in a a hesitating hesitating manner, manner, 'em'ly, 'em'ly, she's she's talking talking to to some some 'un 'un in in here.' here.' 'i 'i should should have have thought,' thought,' said said i, i, smiling, smiling, 'that 'that that that was was a a reason reason for for your your being being in in here here too, too, ham.' ham.' 'well, 'well, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, in in a a general general way, way, so so 't 't would would be,' be,' he he returned; returned; 'but 'but look'ee look'ee here, here, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' lowering lowering his his voice, voice, and and speaking speaking very very gravely. gravely. 'it's 'it's a a young young woman, woman, sir sir -- -- a a young young woman, woman, that that em'ly em'ly knowed knowed once, once, and and doen't doen't ought ought to to know know no no more.' more.' when when i i heard heard these these words, words, a a light light began began to to fall fall upon upon the the figure figure i i had had seen seen following following them, them, some some hours hours ago. ago. 'it's 'it's a a poor poor wurem, wurem, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said ham, ham, 'as 'as is is trod trod under under foot foot by by all all the the town. town. up up street street and and down down street. street. the the mowld mowld o' o' the the churchyard churchyard don't don't hold hold any any that that the the folk folk shrink shrink away away from, from, more.' more.' 'did 'did i i see see her her tonight, tonight, ham, ham, on on the the sand, sand, after after we we met met you?' 'keeping 'keeping us us in in sight?' sight?' said said ham. ham. 'it's 'it's like like you did, did, mas'r mas'r davy. davy. not not that that i i know'd know'd then, then, she she was was theer, theer, sir, sir, but but along along of of her her creeping creeping soon soon arterwards arterwards under under em'ly's em'ly's little little winder, winder, when when she she see see the the light light come, come, and and whispering whispering "em'ly, "em'ly, em'ly, em'ly, for for christ's christ's sake, sake, have have a a woman's woman's heart heart towards towards me. me. i i was was once once like like you!" those those was was solemn solemn words, words, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, fur fur to to hear!' hear!' 'they 'they were were indeed, indeed, ham. ham. what what did did em'ly em'ly do?' do?' 'says 'says em'ly, em'ly, "martha, "martha, is is it it you? oh, oh, martha, martha, can can it it be be you?" -- -- for for they they had had sat sat at at work work together, together, many many a a day, day, at at mr. mr. omer's.' omer's.' 'i 'i recollect recollect her her now!' now!' cried cried i, i, recalling recalling one one of of the the two two girls girls i i had had seen seen when when i i first first went went there. there. 'i 'i recollect recollect her her quite quite well!' well!' 'martha 'martha endell,' endell,' said said ham. ham. 'two 'two or or three three year year older older than than em'ly, em'ly, but but was was at at the the school school with with her.' her.' 'i 'i never never heard heard her her name,' name,' said said i. i. 'i 'i didn't didn't mean mean to to interrupt interrupt you.' 'for 'for the the matter matter o' o' that, that, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' replied replied ham, ham, 'all's 'all's told told a'most a'most in in them them words, words, "em'ly, "em'ly, em'ly, em'ly, for for christ's christ's sake, sake, have have a a woman's woman's heart heart towards towards me. me. i i was was once once like like you!" she she wanted wanted to to speak speak to to em'ly. em'ly. em'ly em'ly couldn't couldn't speak speak to to her her theer, theer, for for her her loving loving uncle uncle was was come come home, home, and and he he wouldn't wouldn't -- -- no, no, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said ham, ham, with with great great earnestness, earnestness, 'he 'he couldn't, couldn't, kind-natur'd, kind-natur'd, tender-hearted tender-hearted as as he he is, is, see see them them two two together, together, side side by by side, side, for for all all the the treasures treasures that's that's wrecked wrecked in in the the sea.' sea.' i i felt felt how how true true this this was. was. i i knew knew it, it, on on the the instant, instant, quite quite as as well well as as ham. ham. 'so 'so em'ly em'ly writes writes in in pencil pencil on on a a bit bit of of paper,' paper,' he he pursued, pursued, 'and 'and gives gives it it to to her her out out o' o' winder winder to to bring bring here. here. "show "show that," that," she she says, says, "to "to my my aunt, aunt, mrs. mrs. barkis, barkis, and and she'll she'll set set you down down by by her her fire, fire, for for the the love love of of me, me, till till uncle uncle is is gone gone out, out, and and i i can can come." come." by by and and by by she she tells tells me me what what i i tell tell you, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, and and asks asks me me to to bring bring her. her. what what can can i i do? do? she she doen't doen't ought ought to to know know any any such, such, but but i i can't can't deny deny her, her, when when the the tears tears is is on on her her face.' face.' he he put put his his hand hand into into the the breast breast of of his his shaggy shaggy jacket, jacket, and and took took out out with with great great care care a a pretty pretty little little purse. purse. 'and 'and if if i i could could deny deny her her when when the the tears tears was was on on her her face, face, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said ham, ham, tenderly tenderly adjusting adjusting it it on on the the rough rough palm palm of of his his hand, hand, 'how 'how could could i i deny deny her her when when she she give give me me this this to to carry carry for for her her -- -- knowing knowing what what she she brought brought it it for? for? such such a a toy toy as as it it is!' is!' said said ham, ham, thoughtfully thoughtfully looking looking on on it. it. 'with 'with such such a a little little money money in in it, it, em'ly em'ly my my dear.' dear.' i i shook shook him him warmly warmly by by the the hand hand when when he he had had put put it it away away again again -- -- for for that that was was more more satisfactory satisfactory to to me me than than saying saying anything anything -- -- and and we we walked walked up up and and down, down, for for a a minute minute or or two, two, in in silence. silence. the the door door opened opened then, then, and and peggotty peggotty appeared, appeared, beckoning beckoning to to ham ham to to come come in. in. i i would would have have kept kept away, away, but but she she came came after after me, me, entreating entreating me me to to come come in in too. too. even even then, then, i i would would have have avoided avoided the the room room where where they they all all were, were, but but for for its its being being the the neat-tiled neat-tiled kitchen kitchen i i have have mentioned mentioned more more than than once. once. the the door door opening opening immediately immediately into into it, it, i i found found myself myself among among them them before before i i considered considered whither whither i i was was going. going. the the girl girl -- -- the the same same i i had had seen seen upon upon the the sands sands -- -- was was near near the the fire. fire. she she was was sitting sitting on on the the ground, ground, with with her her head head and and one one arm arm lying lying on on a a chair. chair. i i fancied, fancied, from from the the disposition disposition of of her her figure, figure, that that em'ly em'ly had had but but newly newly risen risen from from the the chair, chair, and and that that the the forlorn forlorn head head might might perhaps perhaps have have been been lying lying on on her her lap. lap. i i saw saw but but little little of of the the girl's girl's face, face, over over which which her her hair hair fell fell loose loose and and scattered, scattered, as as if if she she had had been been disordering disordering it it with with her her own own hands; hands; but but i i saw saw that that she she was was young, young, and and of of a a fair fair complexion. complexion. peggotty peggotty had had been been crying. crying. so so had had little little em'ly. em'ly. not not a a word word was was spoken spoken when when we we first first went went in; in; and and the the dutch dutch clock clock by by the the dresser dresser seemed, seemed, in in the the silence, silence, to to tick tick twice twice as as loud loud as as usual. usual. em'ly em'ly spoke spoke first. first. 'martha 'martha wants,' wants,' she she said said to to ham, ham, 'to 'to go go to to london.' london.' 'why 'why to to london?' london?' returned returned ham. ham. he he stood stood between between them, them, looking looking on on the the prostrate prostrate girl girl with with a a mixture mixture of of compassion compassion for for her, her, and and of of jealousy jealousy of of her her holding holding any any companionship companionship with with her her whom whom he he loved loved so so well, well, which which i i have have always always remembered remembered distinctly. distinctly. they they both both spoke spoke as as if if she she were were ill; ill; in in a a soft, soft, suppressed suppressed tone tone that that was was plainly plainly heard, heard, although although it it hardly hardly rose rose above above a a whisper. whisper. 'better 'better there there than than here,' here,' said said a a third third voice voice aloud aloud -- -- martha's, martha's, though though she she did did not not move. move. 'no 'no one one knows knows me me there. there. everybody everybody knows knows me me here.' here.' 'what 'what will will she she do do there?' there?' inquired inquired ham. ham. she she lifted lifted up up her her head, head, and and looked looked darkly darkly round round at at him him for for a a moment; moment; then then laid laid it it down down again, again, and and curved curved her her right right arm arm about about her her neck, neck, as as a a woman woman in in a a fever, fever, or or in in an an agony agony of of pain pain from from a a shot, shot, might might twist twist herself. herself. 'she 'she will will try try to to do do well,' well,' said said little little em'ly. em'ly. 'you don't don't know know what what she she has has said said to to us. us. does does he he -- -- do do they they -- -- aunt?' aunt?' peggotty peggotty shook shook her her head head compassionately. compassionately. 'i'll 'i'll try,' try,' said said martha, martha, 'if 'if you'll you'll help help me me away. away. i i never never can can do do worse worse than than i i have have done done here. here. i i may may do do better. better. oh!' oh!' with with a a dreadful dreadful shiver, shiver, 'take 'take me me out out of of these these streets, streets, where where the the whole whole town town knows knows me me from from a a child!' child!' as as em'ly em'ly held held out out her her hand hand to to ham, ham, i i saw saw him him put put in in it it a a little little canvas canvas bag. bag. she she took took it, it, as as if if she she thought thought it it were were her her purse, purse, and and made made a a step step or or two two forward; forward; but but finding finding her her mistake, mistake, came came back back to to where where he he had had retired retired near near me, me, and and showed showed it it to to him. him. 'it's 'it's all all yourn, yourn, em'ly,' em'ly,' i i could could hear hear him him say. say. 'i 'i haven't haven't nowt nowt in in all all the the wureld wureld that that ain't ain't yourn, yourn, my my dear. dear. it it ain't ain't of of no no delight delight to to me, me, except except for for you!' the the tears tears rose rose freshly freshly in in her her eyes, eyes, but but she she turned turned away away and and went went to to martha. martha. what what she she gave gave her, her, i i don't don't know. know. i i saw saw her her stooping stooping over over her, her, and and putting putting money money in in her her bosom. bosom. she she whispered whispered something, something, as as she she asked asked was was that that enough? enough? 'more 'more than than enough,' enough,' the the other other said, said, and and took took her her hand hand and and kissed kissed it. it. then then martha martha arose, arose, and and gathering gathering her her shawl shawl about about her, her, covering covering her her face face with with it, it, and and weeping weeping aloud, aloud, went went slowly slowly to to the the door. door. she she stopped stopped a a moment moment before before going going out, out, as as if if she she would would have have uttered uttered something something or or turned turned back; back; but but no no word word passed passed her her lips. lips. making making the the same same low, low, dreary, dreary, wretched wretched moaning moaning in in her her shawl, shawl, she she went went away. away. as as the the door door closed, closed, little little em'ly em'ly looked looked at at us us three three in in a a hurried hurried manner manner and and then then hid hid her her face face in in her her hands, hands, and and fell fell to to sobbing. sobbing. 'doen't, 'doen't, em'ly!' em'ly!' said said ham, ham, tapping tapping her her gently gently on on the the shoulder. shoulder. 'doen't, 'doen't, my my dear! dear! you doen't doen't ought ought to to cry cry so, so, pretty!' pretty!' 'oh, 'oh, ham!' ham!' she she exclaimed, exclaimed, still still weeping weeping pitifully, pitifully, 'i 'i am am not not so so good good a a girl girl as as i i ought ought to to be! be! i i know know i i have have not not the the thankful thankful heart, heart, sometimes, sometimes, i i ought ought to to have!' have!' 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, you have, have, i'm i'm sure,' sure,' said said ham. ham. 'no! 'no! no! no! no!' no!' cried cried little little em'ly, em'ly, sobbing, sobbing, and and shaking shaking her her head. head. 'i 'i am am not not as as good good a a girl girl as as i i ought ought to to be. be. not not near! near! not not near!' near!' and and still still she she cried, cried, as as if if her her heart heart would would break. break. 'i 'i try try your your love love too too much. much. i i know know i i do!' do!' she she sobbed. sobbed. 'i'm 'i'm often often cross cross to to you, and and changeable changeable with with you, when when i i ought ought to to be be far far different. different. you are are never never so so to to me. me. why why am am i i ever ever so so to to you, when when i i should should think think of of nothing nothing but but how how to to be be grateful, grateful, and and to to make make you happy!' happy!' 'you always always make make me me so,' so,' said said ham, ham, 'my 'my dear! dear! i i am am happy happy in in the the sight sight of of you. i i am am happy, happy, all all day day long, long, in in the the thoughts thoughts of of you.' 'ah! 'ah! that's that's not not enough!' enough!' she she cried. cried. 'that 'that is is because because you are are good; good; not not because because i i am! am! oh, oh, my my dear, dear, it it might might have have been been a a better better fortune fortune for for you, if if you had had been been fond fond of of someone someone else else -- -- of of someone someone steadier steadier and and much much worthier worthier than than me, me, who who was was all all bound bound up up in in you, and and never never vain vain and and changeable changeable like like me!' me!' 'poor 'poor little little tender-heart,' tender-heart,' said said ham, ham, in in a a low low voice. voice. 'martha 'martha has has overset overset her, her, altogether.' altogether.' 'please, 'please, aunt,' aunt,' sobbed sobbed em'ly, em'ly, 'come 'come here, here, and and let let me me lay lay my my head head upon upon you. oh, oh, i i am am very very miserable miserable tonight, tonight, aunt! aunt! oh, oh, i i am am not not as as good good a a girl girl as as i i ought ought to to be. be. i i am am not, not, i i know!' know!' peggotty peggotty had had hastened hastened to to the the chair chair before before the the fire. fire. em'ly, em'ly, with with her her arms arms around around her her neck, neck, kneeled kneeled by by her, her, looking looking up up most most earnestly earnestly into into her her face. face. 'oh, 'oh, pray, pray, aunt, aunt, try try to to help help me! me! ham, ham, dear, dear, try try to to help help me! me! mr. mr. david, david, for for the the sake sake of of old old times, times, do, do, please, please, try try to to help help me! me! i i want want to to be be a a better better girl girl than than i i am. am. i i want want to to feel feel a a hundred hundred times times more more thankful thankful than than i i do. do. i i want want to to feel feel more, more, what what a a blessed blessed thing thing it it is is to to be be the the wife wife of of a a good good man, man, and and to to lead lead a a peaceful peaceful life. life. oh oh me, me, oh oh me! me! oh oh my my heart, heart, my my heart!' heart!' she she dropped dropped her her face face on on my my old old nurse's nurse's breast, breast, and, and, ceasing ceasing this this supplication, supplication, which which in in its its agony agony and and grief grief was was half half a a woman's, woman's, half half a a child's, child's, as as all all her her manner manner was was (being, (being, in in that, that, more more natural, natural, and and better better suited suited to to her her beauty, beauty, as as i i thought, thought, than than any any other other manner manner could could have have been), been), wept wept silently, silently, while while my my old old nurse nurse hushed hushed her her like like an an infant. infant. she she got got calmer calmer by by degrees, degrees, and and then then we we soothed soothed her; her; now now talking talking encouragingly, encouragingly, and and now now jesting jesting a a little little with with her, her, until until she she began began to to raise raise her her head head and and speak speak to to us. us. so so we we got got on, on, until until she she was was able able to to smile, smile, and and then then to to laugh, laugh, and and then then to to sit sit up, up, half half ashamed; ashamed; while while peggotty peggotty recalled recalled her her stray stray ringlets, ringlets, dried dried her her eyes, eyes, and and made made her her neat neat again, again, lest lest her her uncle uncle should should wonder, wonder, when when she she got got home, home, why why his his darling darling had had been been crying. crying. i i saw saw her her do, do, that that night, night, what what i i had had never never seen seen her her do do before. before. i i saw saw her her innocently innocently kiss kiss her her chosen chosen husband husband on on the the cheek, cheek, and and creep creep close close to to his his bluff bluff form form as as if if it it were were her her best best support. support. when when they they went went away away together, together, in in the the waning waning moonlight, moonlight, and and i i looked looked after after them, them, comparing comparing their their departure departure in in my my mind mind with with martha's, martha's, i i saw saw that that she she held held his his arm arm with with both both her her hands, hands, and and still still kept kept close close to to him. him. chapter chapter 23. 23. i i corroborate corroborate mr. mr. dick, dick, and and choose choose a a profession profession when when i i awoke awoke in in the the morning morning i i thought thought very very much much of of little little em'ly, em'ly, and and her her emotion emotion last last night, night, after after martha martha had had left. left. i i felt felt as as if if i i had had come come into into the the knowledge knowledge of of those those domestic domestic weaknesses weaknesses and and tendernesses tendernesses in in a a sacred sacred confidence, confidence, and and that that to to disclose disclose them, them, even even to to steerforth, steerforth, would would be be wrong. wrong. i i had had no no gentler gentler feeling feeling towards towards anyone anyone than than towards towards the the pretty pretty creature creature who who had had been been my my playmate, playmate, and and whom whom i i have have always always been been persuaded, persuaded, and and shall shall always always be be persuaded, persuaded, to to my my dying dying day, day, i i then then devotedly devotedly loved. loved. the the repetition repetition to to any any ears ears -- -- even even to to steerforth's steerforth's -- -- of of what what she she had had been been unable unable to to repress repress when when her her heart heart lay lay open open to to me me by by an an accident, accident, i i felt felt would would be be a a rough rough deed, deed, unworthy unworthy of of myself, myself, unworthy unworthy of of the the light light of of our our pure pure childhood, childhood, which which i i always always saw saw encircling encircling her her head. head. i i made made a a resolution, resolution, therefore, therefore, to to keep keep it it in in my my own own breast; breast; and and there there it it gave gave her her image image a a new new grace. grace. while while we we were were at at breakfast, breakfast, a a letter letter was was delivered delivered to to me me from from my my aunt. aunt. as as it it contained contained matter matter on on which which i i thought thought steerforth steerforth could could advise advise me me as as well well as as anyone, anyone, and and on on which which i i knew knew i i should should be be delighted delighted to to consult consult him, him, i i resolved resolved to to make make it it a a subject subject of of discussion discussion on on our our journey journey home. home. for for the the present present we we had had enough enough to to do, do, in in taking taking leave leave of of all all our our friends. friends. mr. mr. barkis barkis was was far far from from being being the the last last among among them, them, in in his his regret regret at at our our departure; departure; and and i i believe believe would would even even have have opened opened the the box box again, again, and and sacrificed sacrificed another another guinea, guinea, if if it it would would have have kept kept us us eight-and-forty eight-and-forty hours hours in in yarmouth. yarmouth. peggotty peggotty and and all all her her family family were were full full of of grief grief at at our our going. going. the the whole whole house house of of omer omer and and joram joram turned turned out out to to bid bid us us good-bye; good-bye; and and there there were were so so many many seafaring seafaring volunteers volunteers in in attendance attendance on on steerforth, steerforth, when when our our portmanteaux portmanteaux went went to to the the coach, coach, that that if if we we had had had had the the baggage baggage of of a a regiment regiment with with us, us, we we should should hardly hardly have have wanted wanted porters porters to to carry carry it. it. in in a a word, word, we we departed departed to to the the regret regret and and admiration admiration of of all all concerned, concerned, and and left left a a great great many many people people very very sorry sorry behind behind us. us. do do you stay stay long long here, here, littimer?' littimer?' said said i, i, as as he he stood stood waiting waiting to to see see the the coach coach start. start. 'no, 'no, sir,' sir,' he he replied; replied; 'probably 'probably not not very very long, long, sir.' sir.' 'he 'he can can hardly hardly say, say, just just now,' now,' observed observed steerforth, steerforth, carelessly. carelessly. 'he 'he knows knows what what he he has has to to do, do, and and he'll he'll do do it.' it.' 'that 'that i i am am sure sure he he will,' will,' said said i. i. littimer littimer touched touched his his hat hat in in acknowledgement acknowledgement of of my my good good opinion, opinion, and and i i felt felt about about eight eight years years old. old. he he touched touched it it once once more, more, wishing wishing us us a a good good journey; journey; and and we we left left him him standing standing on on the the pavement, pavement, as as respectable respectable a a mystery mystery as as any any pyramid pyramid in in egypt. egypt. for for some some little little time time we we held held no no conversation, conversation, steerforth steerforth being being unusually unusually silent, silent, and and i i being being sufficiently sufficiently engaged engaged in in wondering, wondering, within within myself, myself, when when i i should should see see the the old old places places again, again, and and what what new new changes changes might might happen happen to to me me or or them them in in the the meanwhile. meanwhile. at at length length steerforth, steerforth, becoming becoming gay gay and and talkative talkative in in a a moment, moment, as as he he could could become become anything anything he he liked liked at at any any moment, moment, pulled pulled me me by by the the arm: arm: 'find 'find a a voice, voice, david. david. what what about about that that letter letter you were were speaking speaking of of at at breakfast?' breakfast?' 'oh!' 'oh!' said said i, i, taking taking it it out out of of my my pocket. pocket. 'it's 'it's from from my my aunt.' aunt.' 'and 'and what what does does she she say, say, requiring requiring consideration?' consideration?' 'why, 'why, she she reminds reminds me, me, steerforth,' steerforth,' said said i, i, 'that 'that i i came came out out on on this this expedition expedition to to look look about about me, me, and and to to think think a a little.' little.' 'which, 'which, of of course, course, you have have done?' done?' 'indeed 'indeed i i can't can't say say i i have, have, particularly. particularly. to to tell tell you the the truth, truth, i i am am afraid afraid i i have have forgotten forgotten it.' it.' 'well! 'well! look look about about you now, now, and and make make up up for for your your negligence,' negligence,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'look 'look to to the the right, right, and and you'll you'll see see a a flat flat country, country, with with a a good good deal deal of of marsh marsh in in it; it; look look to to the the left, left, and and you'll you'll see see the the same. same. look look to to the the front, front, and and you'll you'll find find no no difference; difference; look look to to the the rear, rear, and and there there it it is is still.' still.' i i laughed, laughed, and and replied replied that that i i saw saw no no suitable suitable profession profession in in the the whole whole prospect; prospect; which which was was perhaps perhaps to to be be attributed attributed to to its its flatness. flatness. 'what 'what says says our our aunt aunt on on the the subject?' subject?' inquired inquired steerforth, steerforth, glancing glancing at at the the letter letter in in my my hand. hand. 'does 'does she she suggest suggest anything?' anything?' 'why, 'why, yes,' yes,' said said i. i. 'she 'she asks asks me, me, here, here, if if i i think think i i should should like like to to be be a a proctor? proctor? what what do do you think think of of it?' it?' 'well, 'well, i i don't don't know,' know,' replied replied steerforth, steerforth, coolly. coolly. 'you may may as as well well do do that that as as anything anything else, else, i i suppose?' suppose?' i i could could not not help help laughing laughing again, again, at at his his balancing balancing all all callings callings and and professions professions so so equally; equally; and and i i told told him him so. so. 'what 'what is is a a proctor, proctor, steerforth?' steerforth?' said said i. i. 'why, 'why, he he is is a a sort sort of of monkish monkish attorney,' attorney,' replied replied steerforth. steerforth. 'he 'he is, is, to to some some faded faded courts courts held held in in doctors' doctors' commons, commons, -- -- a a lazy lazy old old nook nook near near st. st. paul's paul's churchyard churchyard -- -- what what solicitors solicitors are are to to the the courts courts of of law law and and equity. equity. he he is is a a functionary functionary whose whose existence, existence, in in the the natural natural course course of of things, things, would would have have terminated terminated about about two two hundred hundred years years ago. ago. i i can can tell tell you best best what what he he is, is, by by telling telling you what what doctors' doctors' commons commons is. is. it's it's a a little little out-of-the-way out-of-the-way place, place, where where they they administer administer what what is is called called ecclesiastical ecclesiastical law, law, and and play play all all kinds kinds of of tricks tricks with with obsolete obsolete old old monsters monsters of of acts acts of of parliament, parliament, which which three-fourths three-fourths of of the the world world know know nothing nothing about, about, and and the the other other fourth fourth supposes supposes to to have have been been dug dug up, up, in in a a fossil fossil state, state, in in the the days days of of the the edwards. edwards. it's it's a a place place that that has has an an ancient ancient monopoly monopoly in in suits suits about about people's people's wills wills and and people's people's marriages, marriages, and and disputes disputes among among ships ships and and boats.' boats.' 'nonsense, 'nonsense, steerforth!' steerforth!' i i exclaimed. exclaimed. 'you don't don't mean mean to to say say that that there there is is any any affinity affinity between between nautical nautical matters matters and and ecclesiastical ecclesiastical matters?' matters?' 'i 'i don't, don't, indeed, indeed, my my dear dear boy,' boy,' he he returned; returned; 'but 'but i i mean mean to to say say that that they they are are managed managed and and decided decided by by the the same same set set of of people, people, down down in in that that same same doctors' doctors' commons. commons. you shall shall go go there there one one day, day, and and find find them them blundering blundering through through half half the the nautical nautical terms terms in in young's young's dictionary, dictionary, apropos apropos of of the the "nancy" "nancy" having having run run down down the the "sarah "sarah jane", jane", or or mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and the the yarmouth yarmouth boatmen boatmen having having put put off off in in a a gale gale of of wind wind with with an an anchor anchor and and cable cable to to the the "nelson" "nelson" indiaman indiaman in in distress; distress; and and you shall shall go go there there another another day, day, and and find find them them deep deep in in the the evidence, evidence, pro pro and and con, con, respecting respecting a a clergyman clergyman who who has has misbehaved misbehaved himself; himself; and and you shall shall find find the the judge judge in in the the nautical nautical case, case, the the advocate advocate in in the the clergyman's clergyman's case, case, or or contrariwise. contrariwise. they they are are like like actors: actors: now now a a man's man's a a judge, judge, and and now now he he is is not not a a judge; judge; now now he's he's one one thing, thing, now now he's he's another; another; now now he's he's something something else, else, change change and and change change about; about; but but it's it's always always a a very very pleasant, pleasant, profitable profitable little little affair affair of of private private theatricals, theatricals, presented presented to to an an uncommonly uncommonly select select audience.' audience.' 'but 'but advocates advocates and and proctors proctors are are not not one one and and the the same?' same?' said said i, i, a a little little puzzled. puzzled. 'are 'are they?' they?' 'no,' 'no,' returned returned steerforth, steerforth, 'the 'the advocates advocates are are civilians civilians -- -- men men who who have have taken taken a a doctor's doctor's degree degree at at college college -- -- which which is is the the first first reason reason of of my my knowing knowing anything anything about about it. it. the the proctors proctors employ employ the the advocates. advocates. both both get get very very comfortable comfortable fees, fees, and and altogether altogether they they make make a a mighty mighty snug snug little little party. party. on on the the whole, whole, i i would would recommend recommend you to to take take to to doctors' doctors' commons commons kindly, kindly, david. david. they they plume plume them-selves them-selves on on their their gentility gentility there, there, i i can can tell tell you, if if that's that's any any satisfaction.' satisfaction.' i i made made allowance allowance for for steerforth's steerforth's light light way way of of treating treating the the subject, subject, and, and, considering considering it it with with reference reference to to the the staid staid air air of of gravity gravity and and antiquity antiquity which which i i associated associated with with that that 'lazy 'lazy old old nook nook near near st. st. paul's paul's churchyard', churchyard', did did not not feel feel indisposed indisposed towards towards my my aunt's aunt's suggestion; suggestion; which which she she left left to to my my free free decision, decision, making making no no scruple scruple of of telling telling me me that that it it had had occurred occurred to to her, her, on on her her lately lately visiting visiting her her own own proctor proctor in in doctors' doctors' commons commons for for the the purpose purpose of of settling settling her her will will in in my my favour. favour. 'that's 'that's a a laudable laudable proceeding proceeding on on the the part part of of our our aunt, aunt, at at all all events,' events,' said said steerforth, steerforth, when when i i mentioned mentioned it; it; 'and 'and one one deserving deserving of of all all encouragement. encouragement. daisy, daisy, my my advice advice is is that that you take take kindly kindly to to doctors' doctors' commons.' commons.' i i quite quite made made up up my my mind mind to to do do so. so. i i then then told told steerforth steerforth that that my my aunt aunt was was in in town town awaiting awaiting me me (as (as i i found found from from her her letter), letter), and and that that she she had had taken taken lodgings lodgings for for a a week week at at a a kind kind of of private private hotel hotel at at lincoln's lincoln's inn inn fields, fields, where where there there was was a a stone stone staircase, staircase, and and a a convenient convenient door door in in the the roof; roof; my my aunt aunt being being firmly firmly persuaded persuaded that that every every house house in in london london was was going going to to be be burnt burnt down down every every night. night. we we achieved achieved the the rest rest of of our our journey journey pleasantly, pleasantly, sometimes sometimes recurring recurring to to doctors' doctors' commons, commons, and and anticipating anticipating the the distant distant days days when when i i should should be be a a proctor proctor there, there, which which steerforth steerforth pictured pictured in in a a variety variety of of humorous humorous and and whimsical whimsical lights, lights, that that made made us us both both merry. merry. when when we we came came to to our our journey's journey's end, end, he he went went home, home, engaging engaging to to call call upon upon me me next next day day but but one; one; and and i i drove drove to to lincoln's lincoln's inn inn fields, fields, where where i i found found my my aunt aunt up, up, and and waiting waiting supper. supper. if if i i had had been been round round the the world world since since we we parted, parted, we we could could hardly hardly have have been been better better pleased pleased to to meet meet again. again. my my aunt aunt cried cried outright outright as as she she embraced embraced me; me; and and said, said, pretending pretending to to laugh, laugh, that that if if my my poor poor mother mother had had been been alive, alive, that that silly silly little little creature creature would would have have shed shed tears, tears, she she had had no no doubt. doubt. 'so 'so you have have left left mr. mr. dick dick behind, behind, aunt?' aunt?' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry for for that. that. ah, ah, janet, janet, how how do do you do?' do?' as as janet janet curtsied, curtsied, hoping hoping i i was was well, well, i i observed observed my my aunt's aunt's visage visage lengthen lengthen very very much. much. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry for for it, it, too,' too,' said said my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose. nose. 'i 'i have have had had no no peace peace of of mind, mind, trot, trot, since since i i have have been been here.' here.' before before i i could could ask ask why, why, she she told told me. me. 'i 'i am am convinced,' convinced,' said said my my aunt, aunt, laying laying her her hand hand with with melancholy melancholy firmness firmness on on the the table, table, 'that 'that dick's dick's character character is is not not a a character character to to keep keep the the donkeys donkeys off. off. i i am am confident confident he he wants wants strength strength of of purpose. purpose. i i ought ought to to have have left left janet janet at at home, home, instead, instead, and and then then my my mind mind might might perhaps perhaps have have been been at at ease. ease. if if ever ever there there was was a a donkey donkey trespassing trespassing on on my my green,' green,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with emphasis, emphasis, 'there 'there was was one one this this afternoon afternoon at at four four o'clock. o'clock. a a cold cold feeling feeling came came over over me me from from head head to to foot, foot, and and i i know know it it was was a a donkey!' donkey!' i i tried tried to to comfort comfort her her on on this this point, point, but but she she rejected rejected consolation. consolation. 'it 'it was was a a donkey,' donkey,' said said my my aunt; aunt; 'and 'and it it was was the the one one with with the the stumpy stumpy tail tail which which that that murdering murdering sister sister of of a a woman woman rode, rode, when when she she came came to to my my house.' house.' this this had had been, been, ever ever since, since, the the only only name name my my aunt aunt knew knew for for miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'if 'if there there is is any any donkey donkey in in dover, dover, whose whose audacity audacity it it is is harder harder to to me me to to bear bear than than another's, another's, that,' that,' said said my my aunt, aunt, striking striking the the table, table, 'is 'is the the animal!' animal!' janet janet ventured ventured to to suggest suggest that that my my aunt aunt might might be be disturbing disturbing herself herself unnecessarily, unnecessarily, and and that that she she believed believed the the donkey donkey in in question question was was then then engaged engaged in in the the sand-and-gravel sand-and-gravel line line of of business, business, and and was was not not available available for for purposes purposes of of trespass. trespass. but but my my aunt aunt wouldn't wouldn't hear hear of of it. it. supper supper was was comfortably comfortably served served and and hot, hot, though though my my aunt's aunt's rooms rooms were were very very high high up up -- -- whether whether that that she she might might have have more more stone stone stairs stairs for for her her money, money, or or might might be be nearer nearer to to the the door door in in the the roof, roof, i i don't don't know know -- -- and and consisted consisted of of a a roast roast fowl, fowl, a a steak, steak, and and some some vegetables, vegetables, to to all all of of which which i i did did ample ample justice, justice, and and which which were were all all excellent. excellent. but but my my aunt aunt had had her her own own ideas ideas concerning concerning london london provision, provision, and and ate ate but but little. little. 'i 'i suppose suppose this this unfortunate unfortunate fowl fowl was was born born and and brought brought up up in in a a cellar,' cellar,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and never never took took the the air air except except on on a a hackney hackney coach-stand. coach-stand. i i hope hope the the steak steak may may be be beef, beef, but but i i don't don't believe believe it. it. nothing's nothing's genuine genuine in in the the place, place, in in my my opinion, opinion, but but the the dirt.' dirt.' 'don't 'don't you think think the the fowl fowl may may have have come come out out of of the the country, country, aunt?' aunt?' i i hinted. hinted. 'certainly 'certainly not,' not,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'it 'it would would be be no no pleasure pleasure to to a a london london tradesman tradesman to to sell sell anything anything which which was was what what he he pretended pretended it it was.' was.' i i did did not not venture venture to to controvert controvert this this opinion, opinion, but but i i made made a a good good supper, supper, which which it it greatly greatly satisfied satisfied her her to to see see me me do. do. when when the the table table was was cleared, cleared, janet janet assisted assisted her her to to arrange arrange her her hair, hair, to to put put on on her her nightcap, nightcap, which which was was of of a a smarter smarter construction construction than than usual usual ('in ('in case case of of fire', fire', my my aunt aunt said), said), and and to to fold fold her her gown gown back back over over her her knees, knees, these these being being her her usual usual preparations preparations for for warming warming herself herself before before going going to to bed. bed. i i then then made made her, her, according according to to certain certain established established regulations regulations from from which which no no deviation, deviation, however however slight, slight, could could ever ever be be permitted, permitted, a a glass glass of of hot hot wine wine and and water, water, and and a a slice slice of of toast toast cut cut into into long long thin thin strips. strips. with with these these accompaniments accompaniments we we were were left left alone alone to to finish finish the the evening, evening, my my aunt aunt sitting sitting opposite opposite to to me me drinking drinking her her wine wine and and water; water; soaking soaking her her strips strips of of toast toast in in it, it, one one by by one, one, before before eating eating them; them; and and looking looking benignantly benignantly on on me, me, from from among among the the borders borders of of her her nightcap. nightcap. 'well, 'well, trot,' trot,' she she began, began, 'what 'what do do you think think of of the the proctor proctor plan? plan? or or have have you not not begun begun to to think think about about it it yet?' yet?' 'i 'i have have thought thought a a good good deal deal about about it, it, my my dear dear aunt, aunt, and and i i have have talked talked a a good good deal deal about about it it with with steerforth. steerforth. i i like like it it very very much much indeed. indeed. i i like like it it exceedingly.' exceedingly.' 'come!' 'come!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'that's 'that's cheering!' cheering!' 'i 'i have have only only one one difficulty, difficulty, aunt.' aunt.' 'say 'say what what it it is, is, trot,' trot,' she she returned. returned. 'why, 'why, i i want want to to ask, ask, aunt, aunt, as as this this seems, seems, from from what what i i understand, understand, to to be be a a limited limited profession, profession, whether whether my my entrance entrance into into it it would would not not be be very very expensive?' expensive?' 'it 'it will will cost,' cost,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'to 'to article article you, just just a a thousand thousand pounds.' pounds.' 'now, 'now, my my dear dear aunt,' aunt,' said said i, i, drawing drawing my my chair chair nearer, nearer, 'i 'i am am uneasy uneasy in in my my mind mind about about that. that. it's it's a a large large sum sum of of money. money. you have have expended expended a a great great deal deal on on my my education, education, and and have have always always been been as as liberal liberal to to me me in in all all things things as as it it was was possible possible to to be. be. you have have been been the the soul soul of of generosity. generosity. surely surely there there are are some some ways ways in in which which i i might might begin begin life life with with hardly hardly any any outlay, outlay, and and yet yet begin begin with with a a good good hope hope of of getting getting on on by by resolution resolution and and exertion. exertion. are are you sure sure that that it it would would not not be be better better to to try try that that course? course? are are you certain certain that that you can can afford afford to to part part with with so so much much money, money, and and that that it it is is right right that that it it should should be be so so expended? expended? i i only only ask ask you, my my second second mother, mother, to to consider. consider. are are you certain?' certain?' my my aunt aunt finished finished eating eating the the piece piece of of toast toast on on which which she she was was then then engaged, engaged, looking looking me me full full in in the the face face all all the the while; while; and and then then setting setting her her glass glass on on the the chimney-piece, chimney-piece, and and folding folding her her hands hands upon upon her her folded folded skirts, skirts, replied replied as as follows: follows: 'trot, 'trot, my my child, child, if if i i have have any any object object in in life, life, it it is is to to provide provide for for your your being being a a good, good, a a sensible, sensible, and and a a happy happy man. man. i i am am bent bent upon upon it it -- -- so so is is dick. dick. i i should should like like some some people people that that i i know know to to hear hear dick's dick's conversation conversation on on the the subject. subject. its its sagacity sagacity is is wonderful. wonderful. but but no no one one knows knows the the resources resources of of that that man's man's intellect, intellect, except except myself!' myself!' she she stopped stopped for for a a moment moment to to take take my my hand hand between between hers, hers, and and went went on: on: 'it's 'it's in in vain, vain, trot, trot, to to recall recall the the past, past, unless unless it it works works some some influence influence upon upon the the present. present. perhaps perhaps i i might might have have been been better better friends friends with with your your poor poor father. father. perhaps perhaps i i might might have have been been better better friends friends with with that that poor poor child child your your mother, mother, even even after after your your sister sister betsey betsey trotwood trotwood disappointed disappointed me. me. when when you came came to to me, me, a a little little runaway runaway boy, boy, all all dusty dusty and and way-worn, way-worn, perhaps perhaps i i thought thought so. so. from from that that time time until until now, now, trot, trot, you have have ever ever been been a a credit credit to to me me and and a a pride pride and and a a pleasure. pleasure. i i have have no no other other claim claim upon upon my my means; means; at at least' least' -- -- here here to to my my surprise surprise she she hesitated, hesitated, and and was was confused confused -- -- 'no, 'no, i i have have no no other other claim claim upon upon my my means means -- -- and and you are are my my adopted adopted child. child. only only be be a a loving loving child child to to me me in in my my age, age, and and bear bear with with my my whims whims and and fancies; fancies; and and you will will do do more more for for an an old old woman woman whose whose prime prime of of life life was was not not so so happy happy or or conciliating conciliating as as it it might might have have been, been, than than ever ever that that old old woman woman did did for for you.' it it was was the the first first time time i i had had heard heard my my aunt aunt refer refer to to her her past past history. history. there there was was a a magnanimity magnanimity in in her her quiet quiet way way of of doing doing so, so, and and of of dismissing dismissing it, it, which which would would have have exalted exalted her her in in my my respect respect and and affection, affection, if if anything anything could. could. 'all 'all is is agreed agreed and and understood understood between between us, us, now, now, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and we we need need talk talk of of this this no no more. more. give give me me a a kiss, kiss, and and we'll we'll go go to to the the commons commons after after breakfast breakfast tomorrow.' tomorrow.' we we had had a a long long chat chat by by the the fire fire before before we we went went to to bed. bed. i i slept slept in in a a room room on on the the same same floor floor with with my my aunt's, aunt's, and and was was a a little little disturbed disturbed in in the the course course of of the the night night by by her her knocking knocking at at my my door door as as often often as as she she was was agitated agitated by by a a distant distant sound sound of of hackney-coaches hackney-coaches or or market-carts, market-carts, and and inquiring, inquiring, 'if 'if i i heard heard the the engines?' engines?' but but towards towards morning morning she she slept slept better, better, and and suffered suffered me me to to do do so so too. too. at at about about mid-day, mid-day, we we set set out out for for the the office office of of messrs messrs spenlow spenlow and and jorkins, jorkins, in in doctors' doctors' commons. commons. my my aunt, aunt, who who had had this this other other general general opinion opinion in in reference reference to to london, london, that that every every man man she she saw saw was was a a pickpocket, pickpocket, gave gave me me her her purse purse to to carry carry for for her, her, which which had had ten ten guineas guineas in in it it and and some some silver. silver. we we made made a a pause pause at at the the toy toy shop shop in in fleet fleet street, street, to to see see the the giants giants of of saint saint dunstan's dunstan's strike strike upon upon the the bells bells -- -- we we had had timed timed our our going, going, so so as as to to catch catch them them at at it, it, at at twelve twelve o'clock o'clock -- -- and and then then went went on on towards towards ludgate ludgate hill, hill, and and st. st. paul's paul's churchyard. churchyard. we we were were crossing crossing to to the the former former place, place, when when i i found found that that my my aunt aunt greatly greatly accelerated accelerated her her speed, speed, and and looked looked frightened. frightened. i i observed, observed, at at the the same same time, time, that that a a lowering lowering ill-dressed ill-dressed man man who who had had stopped stopped and and stared stared at at us us in in passing, passing, a a little little before, before, was was coming coming so so close close after after us us as as to to brush brush against against her. her. 'trot! 'trot! my my dear dear trot!' trot!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, in in a a terrified terrified whisper, whisper, and and pressing pressing my my arm. arm. 'i 'i don't don't know know what what i i am am to to do.' do.' 'don't 'don't be be alarmed,' alarmed,' said said i. i. 'there's 'there's nothing nothing to to be be afraid afraid of. of. step step into into a a shop, shop, and and i'll i'll soon soon get get rid rid of of this this fellow.' fellow.' 'no, 'no, no, no, child!' child!' she she returned. returned. 'don't 'don't speak speak to to him him for for the the world. world. i i entreat, entreat, i i order order you!' 'good 'good heaven, heaven, aunt!' aunt!' said said i. i. 'he 'he is is nothing nothing but but a a sturdy sturdy beggar.' beggar.' 'you don't don't know know what what he he is!' is!' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. 'you don't don't know know who who he he is! is! you don't don't know know what what you say!' say!' we we had had stopped stopped in in an an empty empty door-way, door-way, while while this this was was passing, passing, and and he he had had stopped stopped too. too. 'don't 'don't look look at at him!' him!' said said my my aunt, aunt, as as i i turned turned my my head head indignantly, indignantly, 'but 'but get get me me a a coach, coach, my my dear, dear, and and wait wait for for me me in in st. st. paul's paul's churchyard.' churchyard.' 'wait 'wait for for you?' i i replied. replied. 'yes,' 'yes,' rejoined rejoined my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i must must go go alone. alone. i i must must go go with with him.' him.' 'with 'with him, him, aunt? aunt? this this man?' man?' 'i 'i am am in in my my senses,' senses,' she she replied, replied, 'and 'and i i tell tell you i i must. must. get get mea mea coach!' coach!' however however much much astonished astonished i i might might be, be, i i was was sensible sensible that that i i had had no no right right to to refuse refuse compliance compliance with with such such a a peremptory peremptory command. command. i i hurried hurried away away a a few few paces, paces, and and called called a a hackney-chariot hackney-chariot which which was was passing passing empty. empty. almost almost before before i i could could let let down down the the steps, steps, my my aunt aunt sprang sprang in, in, i i don't don't know know how, how, and and the the man man followed. followed. she she waved waved her her hand hand to to me me to to go go away, away, so so earnestly, earnestly, that, that, all all confounded confounded as as i i was, was, i i turned turned from from them them at at once. once. in in doing doing so, so, i i heard heard her her say say to to the the coachman, coachman, 'drive 'drive anywhere! anywhere! drive drive straight straight on!' on!' and and presently presently the the chariot chariot passed passed me, me, going going up up the the hill. hill. what what mr. mr. dick dick had had told told me, me, and and what what i i had had supposed supposed to to be be a a delusion delusion of of his, his, now now came came into into my my mind. mind. i i could could not not doubt doubt that that this this person person was was the the person person of of whom whom he he had had made made such such mysterious mysterious mention, mention, though though what what the the nature nature of of his his hold hold upon upon my my aunt aunt could could possibly possibly be, be, i i was was quite quite unable unable to to imagine. imagine. after after half half an an hour's hour's cooling cooling in in the the churchyard, churchyard, i i saw saw the the chariot chariot coming coming back. back. the the driver driver stopped stopped beside beside me, me, and and my my aunt aunt was was sitting sitting in in it it alone. alone. she she had had not not yet yet sufficiently sufficiently recovered recovered from from her her agitation agitation to to be be quite quite prepared prepared for for the the visit visit we we had had to to make. make. she she desired desired me me to to get get into into the the chariot, chariot, and and to to tell tell the the coachman coachman to to drive drive slowly slowly up up and and down down a a little little while. while. she she said said no no more, more, except, except, 'my 'my dear dear child, child, never never ask ask me me what what it it was, was, and and don't don't refer refer to to it,' it,' until until she she had had perfectly perfectly regained regained her her composure, composure, when when she she told told me me she she was was quite quite herself herself now, now, and and we we might might get get out. out. on on her her giving giving me me her her purse purse to to pay pay the the driver, driver, i i found found that that all all the the guineas guineas were were gone, gone, and and only only the the loose loose silver silver remained. remained. doctors' doctors' commons commons was was approached approached by by a a little little low low archway. archway. before before we we had had taken taken many many paces paces down down the the street street beyond beyond it, it, the the noise noise of of the the city city seemed seemed to to melt, melt, as as if if by by magic, magic, into into a a softened softened distance. distance. a a few few dull dull courts courts and and narrow narrow ways ways brought brought us us to to the the sky-lighted sky-lighted offices offices of of spenlow spenlow and and jorkins; jorkins; in in the the vestibule vestibule of of which which temple, temple, accessible accessible to to pilgrims pilgrims without without the the ceremony ceremony of of knocking, knocking, three three or or four four clerks clerks were were at at work work as as copyists. copyists. one one of of these, these, a a little little dry dry man, man, sitting sitting by by himself, himself, who who wore wore a a stiff stiff brown brown wig wig that that looked looked as as if if it it were were made made of of gingerbread, gingerbread, rose rose to to receive receive my my aunt, aunt, and and show show us us into into mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's room. room. 'mr. 'mr. spenlow's spenlow's in in court, court, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said the the dry dry man; man; 'it's 'it's an an arches arches day; day; but but it's it's close close by, by, and and i'll i'll send send for for him him directly.' directly.' as as we we were were left left to to look look about about us us while while mr. mr. spenlow spenlow was was fetched, fetched, i i availed availed myself myself of of the the opportunity. opportunity. the the furniture furniture of of the the room room was was old-fashioned old-fashioned and and dusty; dusty; and and the the green green baize baize on on the the top top of of the the writing-table writing-table had had lost lost all all its its colour, colour, and and was was as as withered withered and and pale pale as as an an old old pauper. pauper. there there were were a a great great many many bundles bundles of of papers papers on on it, it, some some endorsed endorsed as as allegations, allegations, and and some some (to (to my my surprise) surprise) as as libels, libels, and and some some as as being being in in the the consistory consistory court, court, and and some some in in the the arches arches court, court, and and some some in in the the prerogative prerogative court, court, and and some some in in the the admiralty admiralty court, court, and and some some in in the the delegates' delegates' court; court; giving giving me me occasion occasion to to wonder wonder much, much, how how many many courts courts there there might might be be in in the the gross, gross, and and how how long long it it would would take take to to understand understand them them all. all. besides besides these, these, there there were were sundry sundry immense immense manuscript manuscript books books of of evidence evidence taken taken on on affidavit, affidavit, strongly strongly bound, bound, and and tied tied together together in in massive massive sets, sets, a a set set to to each each cause, cause, as as if if every every cause cause were were a a history history in in ten ten or or twenty twenty volumes. volumes. all all this this looked looked tolerably tolerably expensive, expensive, i i thought, thought, and and gave gave me me an an agreeable agreeable notion notion of of a a proctor's proctor's business. business. i i was was casting casting my my eyes eyes with with increasing increasing complacency complacency over over these these and and many many similar similar objects, objects, when when hasty hasty footsteps footsteps were were heard heard in in the the room room outside, outside, and and mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, in in a a black black gown gown trimmed trimmed with with white white fur, fur, came came hurrying hurrying in, in, taking taking off off his his hat hat as as he he came. came. he he was was a a little little light-haired light-haired gentleman, gentleman, with with undeniable undeniable boots, boots, and and the the stiffest stiffest of of white white cravats cravats and and shirt-collars. shirt-collars. he he was was buttoned buttoned up, up, mighty mighty trim trim and and tight, tight, and and must must have have taken taken a a great great deal deal of of pains pains with with his his whiskers, whiskers, which which were were accurately accurately curled. curled. his his gold gold watch-chain watch-chain was was so so massive, massive, that that a a fancy fancy came came across across me, me, that that he he ought ought to to have have a a sinewy sinewy golden golden arm, arm, to to draw draw it it out out with, with, like like those those which which are are put put up up over over the the goldbeaters' goldbeaters' shops. shops. he he was was got got up up with with such such care, care, and and was was so so stiff, stiff, that that he he could could hardly hardly bend bend himself; himself; being being obliged, obliged, when when he he glanced glanced at at some some papers papers on on his his desk, desk, after after sitting sitting down down in in his his chair, chair, to to move move his his whole whole body, body, from from the the bottom bottom of of his his spine, spine, like like punch. punch. i i had had previously previously been been presented presented by by my my aunt, aunt, and and had had been been courteously courteously received. received. he he now now said: said: 'and 'and so, so, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, you think think of of entering entering into into our our profession? profession? i i casually casually mentioned mentioned to to miss miss trotwood, trotwood, when when i i had had the the pleasure pleasure of of an an interview interview with with her her the the other other day,' day,' -- -- with with another another inclination inclination of of his his body body -- -- punch punch again again -- -- 'that 'that there there was was a a vacancy vacancy here. here. miss miss trotwood trotwood was was good good enough enough to to mention mention that that she she had had a a nephew nephew who who was was her her peculiar peculiar care, care, and and for for whom whom she she was was seeking seeking to to provide provide genteelly genteelly in in life. life. that that nephew, nephew, i i believe, believe, i i have have now now the the pleasure pleasure of' of' -- -- punch punch again. again. i i bowed bowed my my acknowledgements, acknowledgements, and and said, said, my my aunt aunt had had mentioned mentioned to to me me that that there there was was that that opening, opening, and and that that i i believed believed i i should should like like it it very very much. much. that that i i was was strongly strongly inclined inclined to to like like it, it, and and had had taken taken immediately immediately to to the the proposal. proposal. that that i i could could not not absolutely absolutely pledge pledge myself myself to to like like it, it, until until i i knew knew something something more more about about it. it. that that although although it it was was little little else else than than a a matter matter of of form, form, i i presumed presumed i i should should have have an an opportunity opportunity of of trying trying how how i i liked liked it, it, before before i i bound bound myself myself to to it it irrevocably. irrevocably. 'oh 'oh surely! surely! surely!' surely!' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'we 'we always, always, in in this this house, house, propose propose a a month month -- -- an an initiatory initiatory month. month. i i should should be be happy, happy, myself, myself, to to propose propose two two months months -- -- three three -- -- an an indefinite indefinite period, period, in in fact fact -- -- but but i i have have a a partner. partner. mr. mr. jorkins.' jorkins.' 'and 'and the the premium, premium, sir,' sir,' i i returned, returned, 'is 'is a a thousand thousand pounds?' pounds?' 'and 'and the the premium, premium, stamp stamp included, included, is is a a thousand thousand pounds,' pounds,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'as 'as i i have have mentioned mentioned to to miss miss trotwood, trotwood, i i am am actuated actuated by by no no mercenary mercenary considerations; considerations; few few men men are are less less so, so, i i believe; believe; but but mr. mr. jorkins jorkins has has his his opinions opinions on on these these subjects, subjects, and and i i am am bound bound to to respect respect mr. mr. jorkins's jorkins's opinions. opinions. mr. mr. jorkins jorkins thinks thinks a a thousand thousand pounds pounds too too little, little, in in short.' short.' 'i 'i suppose, suppose, sir,' sir,' said said i, i, still still desiring desiring to to spare spare my my aunt, aunt, 'that 'that it it is is not not the the custom custom here, here, if if an an articled articled clerk clerk were were particularly particularly useful, useful, and and made made himself himself a a perfect perfect master master of of his his profession' profession' -- -- i i could could not not help help blushing, blushing, this this looked looked so so like like praising praising myself myself -- -- 'i 'i suppose suppose it it is is not not the the custom, custom, in in the the later later years years of of his his time, time, to to allow allow him him any any -- -- ' ' mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, by by a a great great effort, effort, just just lifted lifted his his head head far far enough enough out out of of his his cravat cravat to to shake shake it, it, and and answered, answered, anticipating anticipating the the word word 'salary': 'salary': 'no. 'no. i i will will not not say say what what consideration consideration i i might might give give to to that that point point myself, myself, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, if if i i were were unfettered. unfettered. mr. mr. jorkins jorkins is is immovable.' immovable.' i i was was quite quite dismayed dismayed by by the the idea idea of of this this terrible terrible jorkins. jorkins. but but i i found found out out afterwards afterwards that that he he was was a a mild mild man man of of a a heavy heavy temperament, temperament, whose whose place place in in the the business business was was to to keep keep himself himself in in the the background, background, and and be be constantly constantly exhibited exhibited by by name name as as the the most most obdurate obdurate and and ruthless ruthless of of men. men. if if a a clerk clerk wanted wanted his his salary salary raised, raised, mr. mr. jorkins jorkins wouldn't wouldn't listen listen to to such such a a proposition. proposition. if if a a client client were were slow slow to to settle settle his his bill bill of of costs, costs, mr. mr. jorkins jorkins was was resolved resolved to to have have it it paid; paid; and and however however painful painful these these things things might might be be (and (and always always were) were) to to the the feelings feelings of of mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, mr. mr. jorkins jorkins would would have have his his bond. bond. the the heart heart and and hand hand of of the the good good angel angel spenlow spenlow would would have have been been always always open, open, but but for for the the restraining restraining demon demon jorkins. jorkins. as as i i have have grown grown older, older, i i think think i i have have had had experience experience of of some some other other houses houses doing doing business business on on the the principle principle of of spenlow spenlow and and jorkins! jorkins! it it was was settled settled that that i i should should begin begin my my month's month's probation probation as as soon soon as as i i pleased, pleased, and and that that my my aunt aunt need need neither neither remain remain in in town town nor nor return return at at its its expiration, expiration, as as the the articles articles of of agreement, agreement, of of which which i i was was to to be be the the subject, subject, could could easily easily be be sent sent to to her her at at home home for for her her signature. signature. when when we we had had got got so so far, far, mr. mr. spenlow spenlow offered offered to to take take me me into into court court then then and and there, there, and and show show me me what what sort sort of of place place it it was. was. as as i i was was willing willing enough enough to to know, know, we we went went out out with with this this object, object, leaving leaving my my aunt aunt behind; behind; who who would would trust trust herself, herself, she she said, said, in in no no such such place, place, and and who, who, i i think, think, regarded regarded all all courts courts of of law law as as a a sort sort of of powder-mills powder-mills that that might might blow blow up up at at any any time. time. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow conducted conducted me me through through a a paved paved courtyard courtyard formed formed of of grave grave brick brick houses, houses, which which i i inferred, inferred, from from the the doctors' doctors' names names upon upon the the doors, doors, to to be be the the official official abiding-places abiding-places of of the the learned learned advocates advocates of of whom whom steerforth steerforth had had told told me; me; and and into into a a large large dull dull room, room, not not unlike unlike a a chapel chapel to to my my thinking, thinking, on on the the left left hand. hand. the the upper upper part part of of this this room room was was fenced fenced off off from from the the rest; rest; and and there, there, on on the the two two sides sides of of a a raised raised platform platform of of the the horse-shoe horse-shoe form, form, sitting sitting on on easy easy old-fashioned old-fashioned dining-room dining-room chairs, chairs, were were sundry sundry gentlemen gentlemen in in red red gowns gowns and and grey grey wigs, wigs, whom whom i i found found to to be be the the doctors doctors aforesaid. aforesaid. blinking blinking over over a a little little desk desk like like a a pulpit-desk, pulpit-desk, in in the the curve curve of of the the horse-shoe, horse-shoe, was was an an old old gentleman, gentleman, whom, whom, if if i i had had seen seen him him in in an an aviary, aviary, i i should should certainly certainly have have taken taken for for an an owl, owl, but but who, who, i i learned, learned, was was the the presiding presiding judge. judge. in in the the space space within within the the horse-shoe, horse-shoe, lower lower than than these, these, that that is is to to say, say, on on about about the the level level of of the the floor, floor, were were sundry sundry other other gentlemen, gentlemen, of of mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's rank, rank, and and dressed dressed like like him him in in black black gowns gowns with with white white fur fur upon upon them, them, sitting sitting at at a a long long green green table. table. their their cravats cravats were were in in general general stiff, stiff, i i thought, thought, and and their their looks looks haughty; haughty; but but in in this this last last respect respect i i presently presently conceived conceived i i had had done done them them an an injustice, injustice, for for when when two two or or three three of of them them had had to to rise rise and and answer answer a a question question of of the the presiding presiding dignitary, dignitary, i i never never saw saw anything anything more more sheepish. sheepish. the the public, public, represented represented by by a a boy boy with with a a comforter, comforter, and and a a shabby-genteel shabby-genteel man man secretly secretly eating eating crumbs crumbs out out of of his his coat coat pockets, pockets, was was warming warming itself itself at at a a stove stove in in the the centre centre of of the the court. court. the the languid languid stillness stillness of of the the place place was was only only broken broken by by the the chirping chirping of of this this fire fire and and by by the the voice voice of of one one of of the the doctors, doctors, who who was was wandering wandering slowly slowly through through a a perfect perfect library library of of evidence, evidence, and and stopping stopping to to put put up, up, from from time time to to time, time, at at little little roadside roadside inns inns of of argument argument on on the the journey. journey. altogether, altogether, i i have have never, never, on on any any occasion, occasion, made made one one at at such such a a cosey, cosey, dosey, dosey, old-fashioned, old-fashioned, time-forgotten, time-forgotten, sleepy-headed sleepy-headed little little family-party family-party in in all all my my life; life; and and i i felt felt it it would would be be quite quite a a soothing soothing opiate opiate to to belong belong to to it it in in any any character character -- -- except except perhaps perhaps as as a a suitor. suitor. very very well well satisfied satisfied with with the the dreamy dreamy nature nature of of this this retreat, retreat, i i informed informed mr. mr. spenlow spenlow that that i i had had seen seen enough enough for for that that time, time, and and we we rejoined rejoined my my aunt; aunt; in in company company with with whom whom i i presently presently departed departed from from the the commons, commons, feeling feeling very very young young when when i i went went out out of of spenlow spenlow and and jorkins's, jorkins's, on on account account of of the the clerks clerks poking poking one one another another with with their their pens pens to to point point me me out. out. we we arrived arrived at at lincoln's lincoln's inn inn fields fields without without any any new new adventures, adventures, except except encountering encountering an an unlucky unlucky donkey donkey in in a a costermonger's costermonger's cart, cart, who who suggested suggested painful painful associations associations to to my my aunt. aunt. we we had had another another long long talk talk about about my my plans, plans, when when we we were were safely safely housed; housed; and and as as i i knew knew she she was was anxious anxious to to get get home, home, and, and, between between fire, fire, food, food, and and pickpockets, pickpockets, could could never never be be considered considered at at her her ease ease for for half-an-hour half-an-hour in in london, london, i i urged urged her her not not to to be be uncomfortable uncomfortable on on my my account, account, but but to to leave leave me me to to take take care care of of myself. myself. 'i 'i have have not not been been here here a a week week tomorrow, tomorrow, without without considering considering that that too, too, my my dear,' dear,' she she returned. returned. 'there 'there is is a a furnished furnished little little set set of of chambers chambers to to be be let let in in the the adelphi, adelphi, trot, trot, which which ought ought to to suit suit you to to a a marvel.' marvel.' with with this this brief brief introduction, introduction, she she produced produced from from her her pocket pocket an an advertisement, advertisement, carefully carefully cut cut out out of of a a newspaper, newspaper, setting setting forth forth that that in in buckingham buckingham street street in in the the adelphi adelphi there there was was to to be be let let furnished, furnished, with with a a view view of of the the river, river, a a singularly singularly desirable, desirable, and and compact compact set set of of chambers, chambers, forming forming a a genteel genteel residence residence for for a a young young gentleman, gentleman, a a member member of of one one of of the the inns inns of of court, court, or or otherwise, otherwise, with with immediate immediate possession. possession. terms terms moderate, moderate, and and could could be be taken taken for for a a month month only, only, if if required. required. 'why, 'why, this this is is the the very very thing, thing, aunt!' aunt!' said said i, i, flushed flushed with with the the possible possible dignity dignity of of living living in in chambers. chambers. 'then 'then come,' come,' replied replied my my aunt, aunt, immediately immediately resuming resuming the the bonnet bonnet she she had had a a minute minute before before laid laid aside. aside. 'we'll 'we'll go go and and look look at at 'em.' 'em.' away away we we went. went. the the advertisement advertisement directed directed us us to to apply apply to to mrs. mrs. crupp crupp on on the the premises, premises, and and we we rung rung the the area area bell, bell, which which we we supposed supposed to to communicate communicate with with mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. it it was was not not until until we we had had rung rung three three or or four four times times that that we we could could prevail prevail on on mrs. mrs. crupp crupp to to communicate communicate with with us, us, but but at at last last she she appeared, appeared, being being a a stout stout lady lady with with a a flounce flounce of of flannel flannel petticoat petticoat below below a a nankeen nankeen gown. gown. 'let 'let us us see see these these chambers chambers of of yours, yours, if if you please, please, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'for 'for this this gentleman?' gentleman?' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, feeling feeling in in her her pocket pocket for for her her keys. keys. 'yes, 'yes, for for my my nephew,' nephew,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'and 'and a a sweet sweet set set they they is is for for sich!' sich!' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. so so we we went went upstairs. upstairs. they they were were on on the the top top of of the the house house -- -- a a great great point point with with my my aunt, aunt, being being near near the the fire-escape fire-escape -- -- and and consisted consisted of of a a little little half-blind half-blind entry entry where where you could could see see hardly hardly anything, anything, a a little little stone-blind stone-blind pantry pantry where where you could could see see nothing nothing at at all, all, a a sitting-room, sitting-room, and and a a bedroom. bedroom. the the furniture furniture was was rather rather faded, faded, but but quite quite good good enough enough for for me; me; and, and, sure sure enough, enough, the the river river was was outside outside the the windows. windows. as as i i was was delighted delighted with with the the place, place, my my aunt aunt and and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp withdrew withdrew into into the the pantry pantry to to discuss discuss the the terms, terms, while while i i remained remained on on the the sitting-room sitting-room sofa, sofa, hardly hardly daring daring to to think think it it possible possible that that i i could could be be destined destined to to live live in in such such a a noble noble residence. residence. after after a a single single combat combat of of some some duration duration they they returned, returned, and and i i saw, saw, to to my my joy, joy, both both in in mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's countenance countenance and and in in my my aunt's, aunt's, that that the the deed deed was was done. done. 'is 'is it it the the last last occupant's occupant's furniture?' furniture?' inquired inquired my my aunt. aunt. 'yes, 'yes, it it is, is, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'what's 'what's become become of of him?' him?' asked asked my my aunt. aunt. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp was was taken taken with with a a troublesome troublesome cough, cough, in in the the midst midst of of which which she she articulated articulated with with much much difficulty. difficulty. 'he 'he was was took took ill ill here, here, ma'am, ma'am, and and -- -- ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh! ugh! dear dear me! me! -- -- and and he he died!' died!' 'hey! 'hey! what what did did he he die die of?' of?' asked asked my my aunt. aunt. 'well, 'well, ma'am, ma'am, he he died died of of drink,' drink,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, in in confidence. confidence. 'and 'and smoke.' smoke.' 'smoke? 'smoke? you don't don't mean mean chimneys?' chimneys?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'no, 'no, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'cigars 'cigars and and pipes.' pipes.' 'that's 'that's not not catching, catching, trot, trot, at at any any rate,' rate,' remarked remarked my my aunt, aunt, turning turning to to me. me. 'no, 'no, indeed,' indeed,' said said i. i. in in short, short, my my aunt, aunt, seeing seeing how how enraptured enraptured i i was was with with the the premises, premises, took took them them for for a a month, month, with with leave leave to to remain remain for for twelve twelve months months when when that that time time was was out. out. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp was was to to find find linen, linen, and and to to cook; cook; every every other other necessary necessary was was already already provided; provided; and and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp expressly expressly intimated intimated that that she she should should always always yearn yearn towards towards me me as as a a son. son. i i was was to to take take possession possession the the day day after after tomorrow, tomorrow, and and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, thank thank heaven heaven she she had had now now found found summun summun she she could could care care for! for! on on our our way way back, back, my my aunt aunt informed informed me me how how she she confidently confidently trusted trusted that that the the life life i i was was now now to to lead lead would would make make me me firm firm and and self-reliant, self-reliant, which which was was all all i i wanted. wanted. she she repeated repeated this this several several times times next next day, day, in in the the intervals intervals of of our our arranging arranging for for the the transmission transmission of of my my clothes clothes and and books books from from mr. mr. wickfield's; wickfield's; relative relative to to which, which, and and to to all all my my late late holiday, holiday, i i wrote wrote a a long long letter letter to to agnes, agnes, of of which which my my aunt aunt took took charge, charge, as as she she was was to to leave leave on on the the succeeding succeeding day. day. not not to to lengthen lengthen these these particulars, particulars, i i need need only only add, add, that that she she made made a a handsome handsome provision provision for for all all my my possible possible wants wants during during my my month month of of trial; trial; that that steerforth, steerforth, to to my my great great disappointment disappointment and and hers hers too, too, did did not not make make his his appearance appearance before before she she went went away; away; that that i i saw saw her her safely safely seated seated in in the the dover dover coach, coach, exulting exulting in in the the coming coming discomfiture discomfiture of of the the vagrant vagrant donkeys, donkeys, with with janet janet at at her her side; side; and and that that when when the the coach coach was was gone, gone, i i turned turned my my face face to to the the adelphi, adelphi, pondering pondering on on the the old old days days when when i i used used to to roam roam about about its its subterranean subterranean arches, arches, and and on on the the happy happy changes changes which which had had brought brought me me to to the the surface. surface. chapter chapter 24. 24. my my first first dissipation dissipation it it was was a a wonderfully wonderfully fine fine thing thing to to have have that that lofty lofty castle castle to to myself, myself, and and to to feel, feel, when when i i shut shut my my outer outer door, door, like like robinson robinson crusoe, crusoe, when when he he had had got got into into his his fortification, fortification, and and pulled pulled his his ladder ladder up up after after him. him. it it was was a a wonderfully wonderfully fine fine thing thing to to walk walk about about town town with with the the key key of of my my house house in in my my pocket, pocket, and and to to know know that that i i could could ask ask any any fellow fellow to to come come home, home, and and make make quite quite sure sure of of its its being being inconvenient inconvenient to to nobody, nobody, if if it it were were not not so so to to me. me. it it was was a a wonderfully wonderfully fine fine thing thing to to let let myself myself in in and and out, out, and and to to come come and and go go without without a a word word to to anyone, anyone, and and to to ring ring mrs. mrs. crupp crupp up, up, gasping, gasping, from from the the depths depths of of the the earth, earth, when when i i wanted wanted her her -- -- and and when when she she was was disposed disposed to to come. come. all all this, this, i i say, say, was was wonderfully wonderfully fine; fine; but but i i must must say, say, too, too, that that there there were were times times when when it it was was very very dreary. dreary. it it was was fine fine in in the the morning, morning, particularly particularly in in the the fine fine mornings. mornings. it it looked looked a a very very fresh, fresh, free free life, life, by by daylight: daylight: still still fresher, fresher, and and more more free, free, by by sunlight. sunlight. but but as as the the day day declined, declined, the the life life seemed seemed to to go go down down too. too. i i don't don't know know how how it it was; was; it it seldom seldom looked looked well well by by candle-light. candle-light. i i wanted wanted somebody somebody to to talk talk to, to, then. then. i i missed missed agnes. agnes. i i found found a a tremendous tremendous blank, blank, in in the the place place of of that that smiling smiling repository repository of of my my confidence. confidence. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp appeared appeared to to be be a a long long way way off. off. i i thought thought about about my my predecessor, predecessor, who who had had died died of of drink drink and and smoke; smoke; and and i i could could have have wished wished he he had had been been so so good good as as to to live, live, and and not not bother bother me me with with his his decease. decease. after after two two days days and and nights, nights, i i felt felt as as if if i i had had lived lived there there for for a a year, year, and and yet yet i i was was not not an an hour hour older, older, but but was was quite quite as as much much tormented tormented by by my my own own youthfulness youthfulness as as ever. ever. steerforth steerforth not not yet yet appearing, appearing, which which induced induced me me to to apprehend apprehend that that he he must must be be ill, ill, i i left left the the commons commons early early on on the the third third day, day, and and walked walked out out to to highgate. highgate. mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was was very very glad glad to to see see me, me, and and said said that that he he had had gone gone away away with with one one of of his his oxford oxford friends friends to to see see another another who who lived lived near near st. st. albans, albans, but but that that she she expected expected him him to to return return tomorrow. tomorrow. i i was was so so fond fond of of him, him, that that i i felt felt quite quite jealous jealous of of his his oxford oxford friends. friends. as as she she pressed pressed me me to to stay stay to to dinner, dinner, i i remained, remained, and and i i believe believe we we talked talked about about nothing nothing but but him him all all day. day. i i told told her her how how much much the the people people liked liked him him at at yarmouth, yarmouth, and and what what a a delightful delightful companion companion he he had had been. been. miss miss dartle dartle was was full full of of hints hints and and mysterious mysterious questions, questions, but but took took a a great great interest interest in in all all our our proceedings proceedings there, there, and and said, said, 'was 'was it it really really though?' though?' and and so so forth, forth, so so often, often, that that she she got got everything everything out out of of me me she she wanted wanted to to know. know. her her appearance appearance was was exactly exactly what what i i have have described described it, it, when when i i first first saw saw her; her; but but the the society society of of the the two two ladies ladies was was so so agreeable, agreeable, and and came came so so natural natural to to me, me, that that i i felt felt myself myself falling falling a a little little in in love love with with her. her. i i could could not not help help thinking, thinking, several several times times in in the the course course of of the the evening, evening, and and particularly particularly when when i i walked walked home home at at night, night, what what delightful delightful company company she she would would be be in in buckingham buckingham street. street. i i was was taking taking my my coffee coffee and and roll roll in in the the morning, morning, before before going going to to the the commons commons -- -- and and i i may may observe observe in in this this place place that that it it is is surprising surprising how how much much coffee coffee mrs. mrs. crupp crupp used, used, and and how how weak weak it it was, was, considering considering -- -- when when steerforth steerforth himself himself walked walked in, in, to to my my unbounded unbounded joy. joy. 'my 'my dear dear steerforth,' steerforth,' cried cried i, i, 'i 'i began began to to think think i i should should never never see see you again!' again!' 'i 'i was was carried carried off, off, by by force force of of arms,' arms,' said said steerforth, steerforth, 'the 'the very very next next morning morning after after i i got got home. home. why, why, daisy, daisy, what what a a rare rare old old bachelor bachelor you are are here!' here!' i i showed showed him him over over the the establishment, establishment, not not omitting omitting the the pantry, pantry, with with no no little little pride, pride, and and he he commended commended it it highly. highly. 'i 'i tell tell you what, what, old old boy,' boy,' he he added, added, 'i 'i shall shall make make quite quite a a town-house town-house of of this this place, place, unless unless you give give me me notice notice to to quit.' quit.' this this was was a a delightful delightful hearing. hearing. i i told told him him if if he he waited waited for for that, that, he he would would have have to to wait wait till till doomsday. doomsday. 'but 'but you shall shall have have some some breakfast!' breakfast!' said said i, i, with with my my hand hand on on the the bell-rope, bell-rope, 'and 'and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp shall shall make make you some some fresh fresh coffee, coffee, and and i'll i'll toast toast you some some bacon bacon in in a a bachelor's bachelor's dutch-oven, dutch-oven, that that i i have have got got here.' here.' 'no, 'no, no!' no!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'don't 'don't ring! ring! i i can't! can't! i i am am going going to to breakfast breakfast with with one one of of these these fellows fellows who who is is at at the the piazza piazza hotel, hotel, in in covent covent garden.' garden.' 'but 'but you'll you'll come come back back to to dinner?' dinner?' said said i. i. 'i 'i can't, can't, upon upon my my life. life. there's there's nothing nothing i i should should like like better, better, but but i i must must remain remain with with these these two two fellows. fellows. we we are are all all three three off off together together tomorrow tomorrow morning.' morning.' 'then 'then bring bring them them here here to to dinner,' dinner,' i i returned. returned. 'do 'do you think think they they would would come?' come?' 'oh! 'oh! they they would would come come fast fast enough,' enough,' said said steerforth; steerforth; 'but 'but we we should should inconvenience inconvenience you. you had had better better come come and and dine dine with with us us somewhere.' somewhere.' i i would would not not by by any any means means consent consent to to this, this, for for it it occurred occurred to to me me that that i i really really ought ought to to have have a a little little house-warming, house-warming, and and that that there there never never could could be be a a better better opportunity. opportunity. i i had had a a new new pride pride in in my my rooms rooms after after his his approval approval of of them, them, and and burned burned with with a a desire desire to to develop develop their their utmost utmost resources. resources. i i therefore therefore made made him him promise promise positively positively in in the the names names of of his his two two friends, friends, and and we we appointed appointed six six o'clock o'clock as as the the dinner-hour. dinner-hour. when when he he was was gone, gone, i i rang rang for for mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, and and acquainted acquainted her her with with my my desperate desperate design. design. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, in in the the first first place, place, of of course course it it was was well well known known she she couldn't couldn't be be expected expected to to wait, wait, but but she she knew knew a a handy handy young young man, man, who who she she thought thought could could be be prevailed prevailed upon upon to to do do it, it, and and whose whose terms terms would would be be five five shillings, shillings, and and what what i i pleased. pleased. i i said, said, certainly certainly we we would would have have him. him. next next mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said said it it was was clear clear she she couldn't couldn't be be in in two two places places at at once once (which (which i i felt felt to to be be reasonable), reasonable), and and that that 'a 'a young young gal' gal' stationed stationed in in the the pantry pantry with with a a bedroom bedroom candle, candle, there there never never to to desist desist from from washing washing plates, plates, would would be be indispensable. indispensable. i i said, said, what what would would be be the the expense expense of of this this young young female? female? and and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said said she she supposed supposed eighteenpence eighteenpence would would neither neither make make me me nor nor break break me. me. i i said said i i supposed supposed not; not; and and that that was was settled. settled. then then mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, now now about about the the dinner. dinner. it it was was a a remarkable remarkable instance instance of of want want of of forethought forethought on on the the part part of of the the ironmonger ironmonger who who had had made made mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's kitchen kitchen fireplace, fireplace, that that it it was was capable capable of of cooking cooking nothing nothing but but chops chops and and mashed mashed potatoes. potatoes. as as to to a a fish-kittle, fish-kittle, mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, well! well! would would i i only only come come and and look look at at the the range? range? she she couldn't couldn't say say fairer fairer than than that. that. would would i i come come and and look look at at it? it? as as i i should should not not have have been been much much the the wiser wiser if if i i had had looked looked at at it, it, i i declined, declined, and and said, said, 'never 'never mind mind fish.' fish.' but but mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, don't don't say say that; that; oysters oysters was was in, in, why why not not them? them? so so that that was was settled. settled. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp then then said said what what she she would would recommend recommend would would be be this. this. a a pair pair of of hot hot roast roast fowls fowls -- -- from from the the pastry-cook's; pastry-cook's; a a dish dish of of stewed stewed beef, beef, with with vegetables vegetables -- -- from from the the pastry-cook's; pastry-cook's; two two little little corner corner things, things, as as a a raised raised pie pie and and a a dish dish of of kidneys kidneys -- -- from from the the pastrycook's; pastrycook's; a a tart, tart, and and (if (if i i liked) liked) a a shape shape of of jelly jelly -- -- from from the the pastrycook's. pastrycook's. this, this, mrs. mrs. crupp crupp said, said, would would leave leave her her at at full full liberty liberty to to concentrate concentrate her her mind mind on on the the potatoes, potatoes, and and to to serve serve up up the the cheese cheese and and celery celery as as she she could could wish wish to to see see it it done. done. i i acted acted on on mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's opinion, opinion, and and gave gave the the order order at at the the pastry-cook's pastry-cook's myself. myself. walking walking along along the the strand, strand, afterwards, afterwards, and and observing observing a a hard hard mottled mottled substance substance in in the the window window of of a a ham ham and and beef beef shop, shop, which which resembled resembled marble, marble, but but was was labelled labelled 'mock 'mock turtle', turtle', i i went went in in and and bought bought a a slab slab of of it, it, which which i i have have since since seen seen reason reason to to believe believe would would have have sufficed sufficed for for fifteen fifteen people. people. this this preparation, preparation, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, after after some some difficulty, difficulty, consented consented to to warm warm up; up; and and it it shrunk shrunk so so much much in in a a liquid liquid state, state, that that we we found found it it what what steerforth steerforth called called 'rather 'rather a a tight tight fit' fit' for for four. four. these these preparations preparations happily happily completed, completed, i i bought bought a a little little dessert dessert in in covent covent garden garden market, market, and and gave gave a a rather rather extensive extensive order order at at a a retail retail wine-merchant's wine-merchant's in in that that vicinity. vicinity. when when i i came came home home in in the the afternoon, afternoon, and and saw saw the the bottles bottles drawn drawn up up in in a a square square on on the the pantry pantry floor, floor, they they looked looked so so numerous numerous (though (though there there were were two two missing, missing, which which made made mrs. mrs. crupp crupp very very uncomfortable), uncomfortable), that that i i was was absolutely absolutely frightened frightened at at them. them. one one of of steerforth's steerforth's friends friends was was named named grainger, grainger, and and the the other other markham. markham. they they were were both both very very gay gay and and lively lively fellows; fellows; grainger, grainger, something something older older than than steerforth; steerforth; markham, markham, youthful-looking, youthful-looking, and and i i should should say say not not more more than than twenty. twenty. i i observed observed that that the the latter latter always always spoke spoke of of himself himself indefinitely, indefinitely, as as 'a 'a man', man', and and seldom seldom or or never never in in the the first first person person singular. singular. 'a 'a man man might might get get on on very very well well here, here, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said markham markham -- -- meaning meaning himself. himself. 'it's 'it's not not a a bad bad situation,' situation,' said said i, i, 'and 'and the the rooms rooms are are really really commodious.' commodious.' 'i 'i hope hope you have have both both brought brought appetites appetites with with you?' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'upon 'upon my my honour,' honour,' returned returned markham, markham, 'town 'town seems seems to to sharpen sharpen a a man's man's appetite. appetite. a a man man is is hungry hungry all all day day long. long. a a man man is is perpetually perpetually eating.' eating.' being being a a little little embarrassed embarrassed at at first, first, and and feeling feeling much much too too young young to to preside, preside, i i made made steerforth steerforth take take the the head head of of the the table table when when dinner dinner was was announced, announced, and and seated seated myself myself opposite opposite to to him. him. everything everything was was very very good; good; we we did did not not spare spare the the wine; wine; and and he he exerted exerted himself himself so so brilliantly brilliantly to to make make the the thing thing pass pass off off well, well, that that there there was was no no pause pause in in our our festivity. festivity. i i was was not not quite quite such such good good company company during during dinner dinner as as i i could could have have wished wished to to be, be, for for my my chair chair was was opposite opposite the the door, door, and and my my attention attention was was distracted distracted by by observing observing that that the the handy handy young young man man went went out out of of the the room room very very often, often, and and that that his his shadow shadow always always presented presented itself, itself, immediately immediately afterwards, afterwards, on on the the wall wall of of the the entry, entry, with with a a bottle bottle at at its its mouth. mouth. the the 'young 'young gal' gal' likewise likewise occasioned occasioned me me some some uneasiness: uneasiness: not not so so much much by by neglecting neglecting to to wash wash the the plates, plates, as as by by breaking breaking them. them. for for being being of of an an inquisitive inquisitive disposition, disposition, and and unable unable to to confine confine herself herself (as (as her her positive positive instructions instructions were) were) to to the the pantry, pantry, she she was was constantly constantly peering peering in in at at us, us, and and constantly constantly imagining imagining herself herself detected; detected; in in which which belief, belief, she she several several times times retired retired upon upon the the plates plates (with (with which which she she had had carefully carefully paved paved the the floor), floor), and and did did a a great great deal deal of of destruction. destruction. these, these, however, however, were were small small drawbacks, drawbacks, and and easily easily forgotten forgotten when when the the cloth cloth was was cleared, cleared, and and the the dessert dessert put put on on the the table; table; at at which which period period of of the the entertainment entertainment the the handy handy young young man man was was discovered discovered to to be be speechless. speechless. giving giving him him private private directions directions to to seek seek the the society society of of mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, and and to to remove remove the the 'young 'young gal' gal' to to the the basement basement also, also, i i abandoned abandoned myself myself to to enjoyment. enjoyment. i i began, began, by by being being singularly singularly cheerful cheerful and and light-hearted; light-hearted; all all sorts sorts of of half-forgotten half-forgotten things things to to talk talk about, about, came came rushing rushing into into my my mind, mind, and and made made me me hold hold forth forth in in a a most most unwonted unwonted manner. manner. i i laughed laughed heartily heartily at at my my own own jokes, jokes, and and everybody everybody else's; else's; called called steerforth steerforth to to order order for for not not passing passing the the wine; wine; made made several several engagements engagements to to go go to to oxford; oxford; announced announced that that i i meant meant to to have have a a dinner-party dinner-party exactly exactly like like that, that, once once a a week, week, until until further further notice; notice; and and madly madly took took so so much much snuff snuff out out of of grainger's grainger's box, box, that that i i was was obliged obliged to to go go into into the the pantry, pantry, and and have have a a private private fit fit of of sneezing sneezing ten ten minutes minutes long. long. i i went went on, on, by by passing passing the the wine wine faster faster and and faster faster yet, yet, and and continually continually starting starting up up with with a a corkscrew corkscrew to to open open more more wine, wine, long long before before any any was was needed. needed. i i proposed proposed steerforth's steerforth's health. health. i i said said he he was was my my dearest dearest friend, friend, the the protector protector of of my my boyhood, boyhood, and and the the companion companion of of my my prime. prime. i i said said i i was was delighted delighted to to propose propose his his health. health. i i said said i i owed owed him him more more obligations obligations than than i i could could ever ever repay, repay, and and held held him him in in a a higher higher admiration admiration than than i i could could ever ever express. express. i i finished finished by by saying, saying, 'i'll 'i'll give give you steerforth! steerforth! god god bless bless him! him! hurrah!' hurrah!' we we gave gave him him three three times times three, three, and and another, another, and and a a good good one one to to finish finish with. with. i i broke broke my my glass glass in in going going round round the the table table to to shake shake hands hands with with him, him, and and i i said said (in (in two two words) words) 'steerforth 'steerforth -- -- you'retheguidingstarofmyexistence.' you'retheguidingstarofmyexistence.' i i went went on, on, by by finding finding suddenly suddenly that that somebody somebody was was in in the the middle middle of of a a song. song. markham markham was was the the singer, singer, and and he he sang sang 'when 'when the the heart heart of of a a man man is is depressed depressed with with care'. care'. he he said, said, when when he he had had sung sung it, it, he he would would give give us us 'woman!' 'woman!' i i took took objection objection to to that, that, and and i i couldn't couldn't allow allow it. it. i i said said it it was was not not a a respectful respectful way way of of proposing proposing the the toast, toast, and and i i would would never never permit permit that that toast toast to to be be drunk drunk in in my my house house otherwise otherwise than than as as 'the 'the ladies!' ladies!' i i was was very very high high with with him, him, mainly mainly i i think think because because i i saw saw steerforth steerforth and and grainger grainger laughing laughing at at me me -- -- or or at at him him -- -- or or at at both both of of us. us. he he said said a a man man was was not not to to be be dictated dictated to. to. i i said said a a man man was. was. he he said said a a man man was was not not to to be be insulted, insulted, then. then. i i said said he he was was right right there there -- -- never never under under my my roof, roof, where where the the lares lares were were sacred, sacred, and and the the laws laws of of hospitality hospitality paramount. paramount. he he said said it it was was no no derogation derogation from from a a man's man's dignity dignity to to confess confess that that i i was was a a devilish devilish good good fellow. fellow. i i instantly instantly proposed proposed his his health. health. somebody somebody was was smoking. smoking. we we were were all all smoking. smoking. i i was was smoking, smoking, and and trying trying to to suppress suppress a a rising rising tendency tendency to to shudder. shudder. steerforth steerforth had had made made a a speech speech about about me, me, in in the the course course of of which which i i had had been been affected affected almost almost to to tears. tears. i i returned returned thanks, thanks, and and hoped hoped the the present present company company would would dine dine with with me me tomorrow, tomorrow, and and the the day day after after -- -- each each day day at at five five o'clock, o'clock, that that we we might might enjoy enjoy the the pleasures pleasures of of conversation conversation and and society society through through a a long long evening. evening. i i felt felt called called upon upon to to propose propose an an individual. individual. i i would would give give them them my my aunt. aunt. miss miss betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, the the best best of of her her sex! sex! somebody somebody was was leaning leaning out out of of my my bedroom bedroom window, window, refreshing refreshing his his forehead forehead against against the the cool cool stone stone of of the the parapet, parapet, and and feeling feeling the the air air upon upon his his face. face. it it was was myself. myself. i i was was addressing addressing myself myself as as 'copperfield', 'copperfield', and and saying, saying, 'why 'why did did you try try to to smoke? smoke? you might might have have known known you couldn't couldn't do do it.' it.' now, now, somebody somebody was was unsteadily unsteadily contemplating contemplating his his features features in in the the looking-glass. looking-glass. that that was was i i too. too. i i was was very very pale pale in in the the looking-glass; looking-glass; my my eyes eyes had had a a vacant vacant appearance; appearance; and and my my hair hair -- -- only only my my hair, hair, nothing nothing else else -- -- looked looked drunk. drunk. somebody somebody said said to to me, me, 'let 'let us us go go to to the the theatre, theatre, copperfield!' copperfield!' there there was was no no bedroom bedroom before before me, me, but but again again the the jingling jingling table table covered covered with with glasses; glasses; the the lamp; lamp; grainger grainger on on my my right right hand, hand, markham markham on on my my left, left, and and steerforth steerforth opposite opposite -- -- all all sitting sitting in in a a mist, mist, and and a a long long way way off. off. the the theatre? theatre? to to be be sure. sure. the the very very thing. thing. come come along! along! but but they they must must excuse excuse me me if if i i saw saw everybody everybody out out first, first, and and turned turned the the lamp lamp off off -- -- in in case case of of fire. fire. owing owing to to some some confusion confusion in in the the dark, dark, the the door door was was gone. gone. i i was was feeling feeling for for it it in in the the window-curtains, window-curtains, when when steerforth, steerforth, laughing, laughing, took took me me by by the the arm arm and and led led me me out. out. we we went went downstairs, downstairs, one one behind behind another. another. near near the the bottom, bottom, somebody somebody fell, fell, and and rolled rolled down. down. somebody somebody else else said said it it was was copperfield. copperfield. i i was was angry angry at at that that false false report, report, until, until, finding finding myself myself on on my my back back in in the the passage, passage, i i began began to to think think there there might might be be some some foundation foundation for for it. it. a a very very foggy foggy night, night, with with great great rings rings round round the the lamps lamps in in the the streets! streets! there there was was an an indistinct indistinct talk talk of of its its being being wet. wet. i i considered considered it it frosty. frosty. steerforth steerforth dusted dusted me me under under a a lamp-post, lamp-post, and and put put my my hat hat into into shape, shape, which which somebody somebody produced produced from from somewhere somewhere in in a a most most extraordinary extraordinary manner, manner, for for i i hadn't hadn't had had it it on on before. before. steerforth steerforth then then said, said, 'you are are all all right, right, copperfield, copperfield, are are you not?' not?' and and i i told told him, him, 'neverberrer.' 'neverberrer.' a a man, man, sitting sitting in in a a pigeon-hole-place, pigeon-hole-place, looked looked out out of of the the fog, fog, and and took took money money from from somebody, somebody, inquiring inquiring if if i i was was one one of of the the gentlemen gentlemen paid paid for, for, and and appearing appearing rather rather doubtful doubtful (as (as i i remember remember in in the the glimpse glimpse i i had had of of him) him) whether whether to to take take the the money money for for me me or or not. not. shortly shortly afterwards, afterwards, we we were were very very high high up up in in a a very very hot hot theatre, theatre, looking looking down down into into a a large large pit, pit, that that seemed seemed to to me me to to smoke; smoke; the the people people with with whom whom it it was was crammed crammed were were so so indistinct. indistinct. there there was was a a great great stage, stage, too, too, looking looking very very clean clean and and smooth smooth after after the the streets; streets; and and there there were were people people upon upon it, it, talking talking about about something something or or other, other, but but not not at at all all intelligibly. intelligibly. there there was was an an abundance abundance of of bright bright lights, lights, and and there there was was music, music, and and there there were were ladies ladies down down in in the the boxes, boxes, and and i i don't don't know know what what more. more. the the whole whole building building looked looked to to me me as as if if it it were were learning learning to to swim; swim; it it conducted conducted itself itself in in such such an an unaccountable unaccountable manner, manner, when when i i tried tried to to steady steady it. it. on on somebody's somebody's motion, motion, we we resolved resolved to to go go downstairs downstairs to to the the dress-boxes, dress-boxes, where where the the ladies ladies were. were. a a gentleman gentleman lounging, lounging, full full dressed, dressed, on on a a sofa, sofa, with with an an opera-glass opera-glass in in his his hand, hand, passed passed before before my my view, view, and and also also my my own own figure figure at at full full length length in in a a glass. glass. then then i i was was being being ushered ushered into into one one of of these these boxes, boxes, and and found found myself myself saying saying something something as as i i sat sat down, down, and and people people about about me me crying crying 'silence!' 'silence!' to to somebody, somebody, and and ladies ladies casting casting indignant indignant glances glances at at me, me, and and -- -- what! what! yes! yes! -- -- agnes, agnes, sitting sitting on on the the seat seat before before me, me, in in the the same same box, box, with with a a lady lady and and gentleman gentleman beside beside her, her, whom whom i i didn't didn't know. know. i i see see her her face face now, now, better better than than i i did did then, then, i i dare dare say, say, with with its its indelible indelible look look of of regret regret and and wonder wonder turned turned upon upon me. me. 'agnes!' 'agnes!' i i said, said, thickly, thickly, 'lorblessmer! 'lorblessmer! agnes!' agnes!' 'hush! 'hush! pray!' pray!' she she answered, answered, i i could could not not conceive conceive why. why. 'you disturb disturb the the company. company. look look at at the the stage!' stage!' i i tried, tried, on on her her injunction, injunction, to to fix fix it, it, and and to to hear hear something something of of what what was was going going on on there, there, but but quite quite in in vain. vain. i i looked looked at at her her again again by by and and by, by, and and saw saw her her shrink shrink into into her her corner, corner, and and put put her her gloved gloved hand hand to to her her forehead. forehead. 'agnes!' 'agnes!' i i said. said. 'i'mafraidyou'renorwell.' 'i'mafraidyou'renorwell.' 'yes, 'yes, yes. yes. do do not not mind mind me, me, trotwood,' trotwood,' she she returned. returned. 'listen! 'listen! are are you going going away away soon?' soon?' 'amigoarawaysoo?' 'amigoarawaysoo?' i i repeated. repeated. 'yes.' 'yes.' i i had had a a stupid stupid intention intention of of replying replying that that i i was was going going to to wait, wait, to to hand hand her her downstairs. downstairs. i i suppose suppose i i expressed expressed it, it, somehow; somehow; for for after after she she had had looked looked at at me me attentively attentively for for a a little little while, while, she she appeared appeared to to understand, understand, and and replied replied in in a a low low tone: tone: 'i 'i know know you will will do do as as i i ask ask you, if if i i tell tell you i i am am very very earnest earnest in in it. it. go go away away now, now, trotwood, trotwood, for for my my sake, sake, and and ask ask your your friends friends to to take take you home.' home.' she she had had so so far far improved improved me, me, for for the the time, time, that that though though i i was was angry angry with with her, her, i i felt felt ashamed, ashamed, and and with with a a short short 'goori!' 'goori!' (which (which i i intended intended for for 'good 'good night!') night!') got got up up and and went went away. away. they they followed, followed, and and i i stepped stepped at at once once out out of of the the box-door box-door into into my my bedroom, bedroom, where where only only steerforth steerforth was was with with me, me, helping helping me me to to undress, undress, and and where where i i was was by by turns turns telling telling him him that that agnes agnes was was my my sister, sister, and and adjuring adjuring him him to to bring bring the the corkscrew, corkscrew, that that i i might might open open another another bottle bottle of of wine. wine. how how somebody, somebody, lying lying in in my my bed, bed, lay lay saying saying and and doing doing all all this this over over again, again, at at cross cross purposes, purposes, in in a a feverish feverish dream dream all all night night -- -- the the bed bed a a rocking rocking sea sea that that was was never never still! still! how, how, as as that that somebody somebody slowly slowly settled settled down down into into myself, myself, did did i i begin begin to to parch, parch, and and feel feel as as if if my my outer outer covering covering of of skin skin were were a a hard hard board; board; my my tongue tongue the the bottom bottom of of an an empty empty kettle, kettle, furred furred with with long long service, service, and and burning burning up up over over a a slow slow fire; fire; the the palms palms of of my my hands, hands, hot hot plates plates of of metal metal which which no no ice ice could could cool! cool! but but the the agony agony of of mind, mind, the the remorse, remorse, and and shame shame i i felt felt when when i i became became conscious conscious next next day! day! my my horror horror of of having having committed committed a a thousand thousand offences offences i i had had forgotten, forgotten, and and which which nothing nothing could could ever ever expiate expiate -- -- my my recollection recollection of of that that indelible indelible look look which which agnes agnes had had given given me me -- -- the the torturing torturing impossibility impossibility of of communicating communicating with with her, her, not not knowing, knowing, beast beast that that i i was, was, how how she she came came to to be be in in london, london, or or where where she she stayed stayed -- -- my my disgust disgust of of the the very very sight sight of of the the room room where where the the revel revel had had been been held held -- -- my my racking racking head head -- -- the the smell smell of of smoke, smoke, the the sight sight of of glasses, glasses, the the impossibility impossibility of of going going out, out, or or even even getting getting up! up! oh, oh, what what a a day day it it was! was! oh, oh, what what an an evening, evening, when when i i sat sat down down by by my my fire fire to to a a basin basin of of mutton mutton broth, broth, dimpled dimpled all all over over with with fat, fat, and and thought thought i i was was going going the the way way of of my my predecessor, predecessor, and and should should succeed succeed to to his his dismal dismal story story as as well well as as to to his his chambers, chambers, and and had had half half a a mind mind to to rush rush express express to to dover dover and and reveal reveal all! all! what what an an evening, evening, when when mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, coming coming in in to to take take away away the the broth-basin, broth-basin, produced produced one one kidney kidney on on a a cheese-plate cheese-plate as as the the entire entire remains remains of of yesterday's yesterday's feast, feast, and and i i was was really really inclined inclined to to fall fall upon upon her her nankeen nankeen breast breast and and say, say, in in heartfelt heartfelt penitence, penitence, 'oh, 'oh, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, never never mind mind the the broken broken meats! meats! i i am am very very miserable!' miserable!' -- -- only only that that i i doubted, doubted, even even at at that that pass, pass, if if mrs. mrs. crupp crupp were were quite quite the the sort sort of of woman woman to to confide confide in! in! chapter chapter 25. 25. good good and and bad bad angels angels i i was was going going out out at at my my door door on on the the morning morning after after that that deplorable deplorable day day of of headache, headache, sickness, sickness, and and repentance, repentance, with with an an odd odd confusion confusion in in my my mind mind relative relative to to the the date date of of my my dinner-party, dinner-party, as as if if a a body body of of titans titans had had taken taken an an enormous enormous lever lever and and pushed pushed the the day day before before yesterday yesterday some some months months back, back, when when i i saw saw a a ticket-porter ticket-porter coming coming upstairs, upstairs, with with a a letter letter in in his his hand. hand. he he was was taking taking his his time time about about his his errand, errand, then; then; but but when when he he saw saw me me on on the the top top of of the the staircase, staircase, looking looking at at him him over over the the banisters, banisters, he he swung swung into into a a trot, trot, and and came came up up panting panting as as if if he he had had run run himself himself into into a a state state of of exhaustion. exhaustion. 't. 't. copperfield, copperfield, esquire,' esquire,' said said the the ticket-porter, ticket-porter, touching touching his his hat hat with with his his little little cane. cane. i i could could scarcely scarcely lay lay claim claim to to the the name: name: i i was was so so disturbed disturbed by by the the conviction conviction that that the the letter letter came came from from agnes. agnes. however, however, i i told told him him i i was was t. t. copperfield, copperfield, esquire, esquire, and and he he believed believed it, it, and and gave gave me me the the letter, letter, which which he he said said required required an an answer. answer. i i shut shut him him out out on on the the landing landing to to wait wait for for the the answer, answer, and and went went into into my my chambers chambers again, again, in in such such a a nervous nervous state state that that i i was was fain fain to to lay lay the the letter letter down down on on my my breakfast breakfast table, table, and and familiarize familiarize myself myself with with the the outside outside of of it it a a little, little, before before i i could could resolve resolve to to break break the the seal. seal. i i found, found, when when i i did did open open it, it, that that it it was was a a very very kind kind note, note, containing containing no no reference reference to to my my condition condition at at the the theatre. theatre. all all it it said said was, was, 'my 'my dear dear trotwood. trotwood. i i am am staying staying at at the the house house of of papa's papa's agent, agent, mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, in in ely ely place, place, holborn. holborn. will will you come come and and see see me me today, today, at at any any time time you like like to to appoint? appoint? ever ever yours yours affectionately, affectionately, agnes.' agnes.' it it took took me me such such a a long long time time to to write write an an answer answer at at all all to to my my satisfaction, satisfaction, that that i i don't don't know know what what the the ticket-porter ticket-porter can can have have thought, thought, unless unless he he thought thought i i was was learning learning to to write. write. i i must must have have written written half-a-dozen half-a-dozen answers answers at at least. least. i i began began one, one, 'how 'how can can i i ever ever hope, hope, my my dear dear agnes, agnes, to to efface efface from from your your remembrance remembrance the the disgusting disgusting impression' impression' -- -- there there i i didn't didn't like like it, it, and and then then i i tore tore it it up. up. i i began began another, another, 'shakespeare 'shakespeare has has observed, observed, my my dear dear agnes, agnes, how how strange strange it it is is that that a a man man should should put put an an enemy enemy into into his his mouth' mouth' -- -- that that reminded reminded me me of of markham, markham, and and it it got got no no farther. farther. i i even even tried tried poetry. poetry. i i began began one one note, note, in in a a six-syllable six-syllable line, line, 'oh, 'oh, do do not not remember' remember' -- -- but but that that associated associated itself itself with with the the fifth fifth of of november, november, and and became became an an absurdity. absurdity. after after many many attempts, attempts, i i wrote, wrote, 'my 'my dear dear agnes. agnes. your your letter letter is is like like you, and and what what could could i i say say of of it it that that would would be be higher higher praise praise than than that? that? i i will will come come at at four four o'clock. o'clock. affectionately affectionately and and sorrowfully, sorrowfully, t.c.' t.c.' with with this this missive missive (which (which i i was was in in twenty twenty minds minds at at once once about about recalling, recalling, as as soon soon as as it it was was out out of of my my hands), hands), the the ticket-porter ticket-porter at at last last departed. departed. if if the the day day were were half half as as tremendous tremendous to to any any other other professional professional gentleman gentleman in in doctors' doctors' commons commons as as it it was was to to me, me, i i sincerely sincerely believe believe he he made made some some expiation expiation for for his his share share in in that that rotten rotten old old ecclesiastical ecclesiastical cheese. cheese. although although i i left left the the office office at at half half past past three, three, and and was was prowling prowling about about the the place place of of appointment appointment within within a a few few minutes minutes afterwards, afterwards, the the appointed appointed time time was was exceeded exceeded by by a a full full quarter quarter of of an an hour, hour, according according to to the the clock clock of of st. st. andrew's, andrew's, holborn, holborn, before before i i could could muster muster up up sufficient sufficient desperation desperation to to pull pull the the private private bell-handle bell-handle let let into into the the left-hand left-hand door-post door-post of of mr. mr. waterbrook's waterbrook's house. house. the the professional professional business business of of mr. mr. waterbrook's waterbrook's establishment establishment was was done done on on the the ground-floor, ground-floor, and and the the genteel genteel business business (of (of which which there there was was a a good good deal) deal) in in the the upper upper part part of of the the building. building. i i was was shown shown into into a a pretty pretty but but rather rather close close drawing-room, drawing-room, and and there there sat sat agnes, agnes, netting netting a a purse. purse. she she looked looked so so quiet quiet and and good, good, and and reminded reminded me me so so strongly strongly of of my my airy airy fresh fresh school school days days at at canterbury, canterbury, and and the the sodden, sodden, smoky, smoky, stupid stupid wretch wretch i i had had been been the the other other night, night, that, that, nobody nobody being being by, by, i i yielded yielded to to my my self-reproach self-reproach and and shame, shame, and and -- -- in in short, short, made made a a fool fool of of myself. myself. i i cannot cannot deny deny that that i i shed shed tears. tears. to to this this hour hour i i am am undecided undecided whether whether it it was was upon upon the the whole whole the the wisest wisest thing thing i i could could have have done, done, or or the the most most ridiculous. ridiculous. 'if 'if it it had had been been anyone anyone but but you, agnes,' agnes,' said said i, i, turning turning away away my my head, head, 'i 'i should should not not have have minded minded it it half half so so much. much. but but that that it it should should have have been been you who who saw saw me! me! i i almost almost wish wish i i had had been been dead, dead, first.' first.' she she put put her her hand hand -- -- its its touch touch was was like like no no other other hand hand -- -- upon upon my my arm arm for for a a moment; moment; and and i i felt felt so so befriended befriended and and comforted, comforted, that that i i could could not not help help moving moving it it to to my my lips, lips, and and gratefully gratefully kissing kissing it. it. 'sit 'sit down,' down,' said said agnes, agnes, cheerfully. cheerfully. 'don't 'don't be be unhappy, unhappy, trotwood. trotwood. if if you cannot cannot confidently confidently trust trust me, me, whom whom will will you trust?' trust?' 'ah, 'ah, agnes!' agnes!' i i returned. returned. 'you are are my my good good angel!' angel!' she she smiled smiled rather rather sadly, sadly, i i thought, thought, and and shook shook her her head. head. 'yes, 'yes, agnes, agnes, my my good good angel! angel! always always my my good good angel!' angel!' 'if 'if i i were, were, indeed, indeed, trotwood,' trotwood,' she she returned, returned, 'there 'there is is one one thing thing that that i i should should set set my my heart heart on on very very much.' much.' i i looked looked at at her her inquiringly; inquiringly; but but already already with with a a foreknowledge foreknowledge of of her her meaning. meaning. 'on 'on warning warning you,' said said agnes, agnes, with with a a steady steady glance, glance, 'against 'against your your bad bad angel.' angel.' 'my 'my dear dear agnes,' agnes,' i i began, began, 'if 'if you mean mean steerforth steerforth -- -- ' ' 'i 'i do, do, trotwood,' trotwood,' she she returned. returned. 'then, 'then, agnes, agnes, you wrong wrong him him very very much. much. he he my my bad bad angel, angel, or or anyone's! anyone's! he, he, anything anything but but a a guide, guide, a a support, support, and and a a friend friend to to me! me! my my dear dear agnes! agnes! now, now, is is it it not not unjust, unjust, and and unlike unlike you, to to judge judge him him from from what what you saw saw of of me me the the other other night?' night?' 'i 'i do do not not judge judge him him from from what what i i saw saw of of you the the other other night,' night,' she she quietly quietly replied. replied. 'from 'from what, what, then?' then?' 'from 'from many many things things -- -- trifles trifles in in themselves, themselves, but but they they do do not not seem seem to to me me to to be be so, so, when when they they are are put put together. together. i i judge judge him, him, partly partly from from your your account account of of him, him, trotwood, trotwood, and and your your character, character, and and the the influence influence he he has has over over you.' there there was was always always something something in in her her modest modest voice voice that that seemed seemed to to touch touch a a chord chord within within me, me, answering answering to to that that sound sound alone. alone. it it was was always always earnest; earnest; but but when when it it was was very very earnest, earnest, as as it it was was now, now, there there was was a a thrill thrill in in it it that that quite quite subdued subdued me. me. i i sat sat looking looking at at her her as as she she cast cast her her eyes eyes down down on on her her work; work; i i sat sat seeming seeming still still to to listen listen to to her; her; and and steerforth, steerforth, in in spite spite of of all all my my attachment attachment to to him, him, darkened darkened in in that that tone. tone. 'it 'it is is very very bold bold in in me,' me,' said said agnes, agnes, looking looking up up again, again, 'who 'who have have lived lived in in such such seclusion, seclusion, and and can can know know so so little little of of the the world, world, to to give give you my my advice advice so so confidently, confidently, or or even even to to have have this this strong strong opinion. opinion. but but i i know know in in what what it it is is engendered, engendered, trotwood, trotwood, -- -- in in how how true true a a remembrance remembrance of of our our having having grown grown up up together, together, and and in in how how true true an an interest interest in in all all relating relating to to you. it it is is that that which which makes makes me me bold. bold. i i am am certain certain that that what what i i say say is is right. right. i i am am quite quite sure sure it it is. is. i i feel feel as as if if it it were were someone someone else else speaking speaking to to you, and and not not i, i, when when i i caution caution you that that you have have made made a a dangerous dangerous friend.' friend.' again again i i looked looked at at her, her, again again i i listened listened to to her her after after she she was was silent, silent, and and again again his his image, image, though though it it was was still still fixed fixed in in my my heart, heart, darkened. darkened. 'i 'i am am not not so so unreasonable unreasonable as as to to expect,' expect,' said said agnes, agnes, resuming resuming her her usual usual tone, tone, after after a a little little while, while, 'that 'that you will, will, or or that that you can, can, at at once, once, change change any any sentiment sentiment that that has has become become a a conviction conviction to to you; least least of of all all a a sentiment sentiment that that is is rooted rooted in in your your trusting trusting disposition. disposition. you ought ought not not hastily hastily to to do do that. that. i i only only ask ask you, trotwood, trotwood, if if you ever ever think think of of me me -- -- i i mean,' mean,' with with a a quiet quiet smile, smile, for for i i was was going going to to interrupt interrupt her, her, and and she she knew knew why, why, 'as 'as often often as as you think think of of me me -- -- to to think think of of what what i i have have said. said. do do you forgive forgive me me for for all all this?' this?' 'i 'i will will forgive forgive you, agnes,' agnes,' i i replied, replied, 'when 'when you come come to to do do steerforth steerforth justice, justice, and and to to like like him him as as well well as as i i do.' do.' 'not 'not until until then?' then?' said said agnes. agnes. i i saw saw a a passing passing shadow shadow on on her her face face when when i i made made this this mention mention of of him, him, but but she she returned returned my my smile, smile, and and we we were were again again as as unreserved unreserved in in our our mutual mutual confidence confidence as as of of old. old. 'and 'and when, when, agnes,' agnes,' said said i, i, 'will 'will you forgive forgive me me the the other other night?' night?' 'when 'when i i recall recall it,' it,' said said agnes. agnes. she she would would have have dismissed dismissed the the subject subject so, so, but but i i was was too too full full of of it it to to allow allow that, that, and and insisted insisted on on telling telling her her how how it it happened happened that that i i had had disgraced disgraced myself, myself, and and what what chain chain of of accidental accidental circumstances circumstances had had had had the the theatre theatre for for its its final final link. link. it it was was a a great great relief relief to to me me to to do do this, this, and and to to enlarge enlarge on on the the obligation obligation that that i i owed owed to to steerforth steerforth for for his his care care of of me me when when i i was was unable unable to to take take care care of of myself. myself. 'you must must not not forget,' forget,' said said agnes, agnes, calmly calmly changing changing the the conversation conversation as as soon soon as as i i had had concluded, concluded, 'that 'that you are are always always to to tell tell me, me, not not only only when when you fall fall into into trouble, trouble, but but when when you fall fall in in love. love. who who has has succeeded succeeded to to miss miss larkins, larkins, trotwood?' trotwood?' 'no 'no one, one, agnes.' agnes.' 'someone, 'someone, trotwood,' trotwood,' said said agnes, agnes, laughing, laughing, and and holding holding up up her her finger. finger. 'no, 'no, agnes, agnes, upon upon my my word! word! there there is is a a lady, lady, certainly, certainly, at at mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's house, house, who who is is very very clever, clever, and and whom whom i i like like to to talk talk to to -- -- miss miss dartle dartle -- -- but but i i don't don't adore adore her.' her.' agnes agnes laughed laughed again again at at her her own own penetration, penetration, and and told told me me that that if if i i were were faithful faithful to to her her in in my my confidence confidence she she thought thought she she should should keep keep a a little little register register of of my my violent violent attachments, attachments, with with the the date, date, duration, duration, and and termination termination of of each, each, like like the the table table of of the the reigns reigns of of the the kings kings and and queens, queens, in in the the history history of of england. england. then then she she asked asked me me if if i i had had seen seen uriah. uriah. 'uriah 'uriah heep?' heep?' said said i. i. 'no. 'no. is is he he in in london?' london?' 'he 'he comes comes to to the the office office downstairs, downstairs, every every day,' day,' returned returned agnes. agnes. 'he 'he was was in in london london a a week week before before me. me. i i am am afraid afraid on on disagreeable disagreeable business, business, trotwood.' trotwood.' 'on 'on some some business business that that makes makes you uneasy, uneasy, agnes, agnes, i i see,' see,' said said i. i. 'what 'what can can that that be?' be?' agnes agnes laid laid aside aside her her work, work, and and replied, replied, folding folding her her hands hands upon upon one one another, another, and and looking looking pensively pensively at at me me out out of of those those beautiful beautiful soft soft eyes eyes of of hers: hers: 'i 'i believe believe he he is is going going to to enter enter into into partnership partnership with with papa.' papa.' 'what? 'what? uriah? uriah? that that mean, mean, fawning fawning fellow, fellow, worm worm himself himself into into such such promotion!' promotion!' i i cried, cried, indignantly. indignantly. 'have 'have you made made no no remonstrance remonstrance about about it, it, agnes? agnes? consider consider what what a a connexion connexion it it is is likely likely to to be. be. you must must speak speak out. out. you must must not not allow allow your your father father to to take take such such a a mad mad step. step. you must must prevent prevent it, it, agnes, agnes, while while there's there's time.' time.' still still looking looking at at me, me, agnes agnes shook shook her her head head while while i i was was speaking, speaking, with with a a faint faint smile smile at at my my warmth: warmth: and and then then replied: replied: 'you remember remember our our last last conversation conversation about about papa? papa? it it was was not not long long after after that that -- -- not not more more than than two two or or three three days days -- -- when when he he gave gave me me the the first first intimation intimation of of what what i i tell tell you. it it was was sad sad to to see see him him struggling struggling between between his his desire desire to to represent represent it it to to me me as as a a matter matter of of choice choice on on his his part, part, and and his his inability inability to to conceal conceal that that it it was was forced forced upon upon him. him. i i felt felt very very sorry.' sorry.' 'forced 'forced upon upon him, him, agnes! agnes! who who forces forces it it upon upon him?' him?' 'uriah,' 'uriah,' she she replied, replied, after after a a moment's moment's hesitation, hesitation, 'has 'has made made himself himself indispensable indispensable to to papa. papa. he he is is subtle subtle and and watchful. watchful. he he has has mastered mastered papa's papa's weaknesses, weaknesses, fostered fostered them, them, and and taken taken advantage advantage of of them, them, until until -- -- to to say say all all that that i i mean mean in in a a word, word, trotwood, trotwood, -- -- until until papa papa is is afraid afraid of of him.' him.' there there was was more more that that she she might might have have said; said; more more that that she she knew, knew, or or that that she she suspected; suspected; i i clearly clearly saw. saw. i i could could not not give give her her pain pain by by asking asking what what it it was, was, for for i i knew knew that that she she withheld withheld it it from from me, me, to to spare spare her her father. father. it it had had long long been been going going on on to to this, this, i i was was sensible: sensible: yes, yes, i i could could not not but but feel, feel, on on the the least least reflection, reflection, that that it it had had been been going going on on to to this this for for a a long long time. time. i i remained remained silent. silent. 'his 'his ascendancy ascendancy over over papa,' papa,' said said agnes, agnes, 'is 'is very very great. great. he he professes professes humility humility and and gratitude gratitude -- -- with with truth, truth, perhaps: perhaps: i i hope hope so so -- -- but but his his position position is is really really one one of of power, power, and and i i fear fear he he makes makes a a hard hard use use of of his his power.' power.' i i said said he he was was a a hound, hound, which, which, at at the the moment, moment, was was a a great great satisfaction satisfaction to to me. me. 'at 'at the the time time i i speak speak of, of, as as the the time time when when papa papa spoke spoke to to me,' me,' pursued pursued agnes, agnes, 'he 'he had had told told papa papa that that he he was was going going away; away; that that he he was was very very sorry, sorry, and and unwilling unwilling to to leave, leave, but but that that he he had had better better prospects. prospects. papa papa was was very very much much depressed depressed then, then, and and more more bowed bowed down down by by care care than than ever ever you or or i i have have seen seen him; him; but but he he seemed seemed relieved relieved by by this this expedient expedient of of the the partnership, partnership, though though at at the the same same time time he he seemed seemed hurt hurt by by it it and and ashamed ashamed of of it.' it.' 'and 'and how how did did you receive receive it, it, agnes?' agnes?' 'i 'i did, did, trotwood,' trotwood,' she she replied, replied, 'what 'what i i hope hope was was right. right. feeling feeling sure sure that that it it was was necessary necessary for for papa's papa's peace peace that that the the sacrifice sacrifice should should be be made, made, i i entreated entreated him him to to make make it. it. i i said said it it would would lighten lighten the the load load of of his his life life -- -- i i hope hope it it will! will! -- -- and and that that it it would would give give me me increased increased opportunities opportunities of of being being his his companion. companion. oh, oh, trotwood!' trotwood!' cried cried agnes, agnes, putting putting her her hands hands before before her her face, face, as as her her tears tears started started on on it, it, 'i 'i almost almost feel feel as as if if i i had had been been papa's papa's enemy, enemy, instead instead of of his his loving loving child. child. for for i i know know how how he he has has altered, altered, in in his his devotion devotion to to me. me. i i know know how how he he has has narrowed narrowed the the circle circle of of his his sympathies sympathies and and duties, duties, in in the the concentration concentration of of his his whole whole mind mind upon upon me. me. i i know know what what a a multitude multitude of of things things he he has has shut shut out out for for my my sake, sake, and and how how his his anxious anxious thoughts thoughts of of me me have have shadowed shadowed his his life, life, and and weakened weakened his his strength strength and and energy, energy, by by turning turning them them always always upon upon one one idea. idea. if if i i could could ever ever set set this this right! right! if if i i could could ever ever work work out out his his restoration, restoration, as as i i have have so so innocently innocently been been the the cause cause of of his his decline!' decline!' i i had had never never before before seen seen agnes agnes cry. cry. i i had had seen seen tears tears in in her her eyes eyes when when i i had had brought brought new new honours honours home home from from school, school, and and i i had had seen seen them them there there when when we we last last spoke spoke about about her her father, father, and and i i had had seen seen her her turn turn her her gentle gentle head head aside aside when when we we took took leave leave of of one one another; another; but but i i had had never never seen seen her her grieve grieve like like this. this. it it made made me me so so sorry sorry that that i i could could only only say, say, in in a a foolish, foolish, helpless helpless manner, manner, 'pray, 'pray, agnes, agnes, don't! don't! don't, don't, my my dear dear sister!' sister!' but but agnes agnes was was too too superior superior to to me me in in character character and and purpose, purpose, as as i i know know well well now, now, whatever whatever i i might might know know or or not not know know then, then, to to be be long long in in need need of of my my entreaties. entreaties. the the beautiful, beautiful, calm calm manner, manner, which which makes makes her her so so different different in in my my remembrance remembrance from from everybody everybody else, else, came came back back again, again, as as if if a a cloud cloud had had passed passed from from a a serene serene sky. sky. 'we 'we are are not not likely likely to to remain remain alone alone much much longer,' longer,' said said agnes, agnes, 'and 'and while while i i have have an an opportunity, opportunity, let let me me earnestly earnestly entreat entreat you, trotwood, trotwood, to to be be friendly friendly to to uriah. uriah. don't don't repel repel him. him. don't don't resent resent (as (as i i think think you have have a a general general disposition disposition to to do) do) what what may may be be uncongenial uncongenial to to you in in him. him. he he may may not not deserve deserve it, it, for for we we know know no no certain certain ill ill of of him. him. in in any any case, case, think think first first of of papa papa and and me!' me!' agnes agnes had had no no time time to to say say more, more, for for the the room room door door opened, opened, and and mrs. mrs. waterbrook, waterbrook, who who was was a a large large lady lady -- -- or or who who wore wore a a large large dress: dress: i i don't don't exactly exactly know know which, which, for for i i don't don't know know which which was was dress dress and and which which was was lady lady -- -- came came sailing sailing in. in. i i had had a a dim dim recollection recollection of of having having seen seen her her at at the the theatre, theatre, as as if if i i had had seen seen her her in in a a pale pale magic magic lantern; lantern; but but she she appeared appeared to to remember remember me me perfectly, perfectly, and and still still to to suspect suspect me me of of being being in in a a state state of of intoxication. intoxication. finding finding by by degrees, degrees, however, however, that that i i was was sober, sober, and and (i (i hope) hope) that that i i was was a a modest modest young young gentleman, gentleman, mrs. mrs. waterbrook waterbrook softened softened towards towards me me considerably, considerably, and and inquired, inquired, firstly, firstly, if if i i went went much much into into the the parks, parks, and and secondly, secondly, if if i i went went much much into into society. society. on on my my replying replying to to both both these these questions questions in in the the negative, negative, it it occurred occurred to to me me that that i i fell fell again again in in her her good good opinion; opinion; but but she she concealed concealed the the fact fact gracefully, gracefully, and and invited invited me me to to dinner dinner next next day. day. i i accepted accepted the the invitation, invitation, and and took took my my leave, leave, making making a a call call on on uriah uriah in in the the office office as as i i went went out, out, and and leaving leaving a a card card for for him him in in his his absence. absence. when when i i went went to to dinner dinner next next day, day, and and on on the the street street door door being being opened, opened, plunged plunged into into a a vapour-bath vapour-bath of of haunch haunch of of mutton, mutton, i i divined divined that that i i was was not not the the only only guest, guest, for for i i immediately immediately identified identified the the ticket-porter ticket-porter in in disguise, disguise, assisting assisting the the family family servant, servant, and and waiting waiting at at the the foot foot of of the the stairs stairs to to carry carry up up my my name. name. he he looked, looked, to to the the best best of of his his ability, ability, when when he he asked asked me me for for it it confidentially, confidentially, as as if if he he had had never never seen seen me me before; before; but but well well did did i i know know him, him, and and well well did did he he know know me. me. conscience conscience made made cowards cowards of of us us both. both. i i found found mr. mr. waterbrook waterbrook to to be be a a middle-aged middle-aged gentleman, gentleman, with with a a short short throat, throat, and and a a good good deal deal of of shirt-collar, shirt-collar, who who only only wanted wanted a a black black nose nose to to be be the the portrait portrait of of a a pug-dog. pug-dog. he he told told me me he he was was happy happy to to have have the the honour honour of of making making my my acquaintance; acquaintance; and and when when i i had had paid paid my my homage homage to to mrs. mrs. waterbrook, waterbrook, presented presented me, me, with with much much ceremony, ceremony, to to a a very very awful awful lady lady in in a a black black velvet velvet dress, dress, and and a a great great black black velvet velvet hat, hat, whom whom i i remember remember as as looking looking like like a a near near relation relation of of hamlet's hamlet's -- -- say say his his aunt. aunt. mrs. mrs. henry henry spiker spiker was was this this lady's lady's name; name; and and her her husband husband was was there there too: too: so so cold cold a a man, man, that that his his head, head, instead instead of of being being grey, grey, seemed seemed to to be be sprinkled sprinkled with with hoar-frost. hoar-frost. immense immense deference deference was was shown shown to to the the henry henry spikers, spikers, male male and and female; female; which which agnes agnes told told me me was was on on account account of of mr. mr. henry henry spiker spiker being being solicitor solicitor to to something something or or to to somebody, somebody, i i forget forget what what or or which, which, remotely remotely connected connected with with the the treasury. treasury. i i found found uriah uriah heep heep among among the the company, company, in in a a suit suit of of black, black, and and in in deep deep humility. humility. he he told told me, me, when when i i shook shook hands hands with with him, him, that that he he was was proud proud to to be be noticed noticed by by me, me, and and that that he he really really felt felt obliged obliged to to me me for for my my condescension. condescension. i i could could have have wished wished he he had had been been less less obliged obliged to to me, me, for for he he hovered hovered about about me me in in his his gratitude gratitude all all the the rest rest of of the the evening; evening; and and whenever whenever i i said said a a word word to to agnes, agnes, was was sure, sure, with with his his shadowless shadowless eyes eyes and and cadaverous cadaverous face, face, to to be be looking looking gauntly gauntly down down upon upon us us from from behind. behind. there there were were other other guests guests -- -- all all iced iced for for the the occasion, occasion, as as it it struck struck me, me, like like the the wine. wine. but but there there was was one one who who attracted attracted my my attention attention before before he he came came in, in, on on account account of of my my hearing hearing him him announced announced as as mr. mr. traddles! traddles! my my mind mind flew flew back back to to salem salem house; house; and and could could it it be be tommy, tommy, i i thought, thought, who who used used to to draw draw the the skeletons! skeletons! i i looked looked for for mr. mr. traddles traddles with with unusual unusual interest. interest. he he was was a a sober, sober, steady-looking steady-looking young young man man of of retiring retiring manners, manners, with with a a comic comic head head of of hair, hair, and and eyes eyes that that were were rather rather wide wide open; open; and and he he got got into into an an obscure obscure corner corner so so soon, soon, that that i i had had some some difficulty difficulty in in making making him him out. out. at at length length i i had had a a good good view view of of him, him, and and either either my my vision vision deceived deceived me, me, or or it it was was the the old old unfortunate unfortunate tommy. tommy. i i made made my my way way to to mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, and and said, said, that that i i believed believed i i had had the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing an an old old schoolfellow schoolfellow there. there. 'indeed!' 'indeed!' said said mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, surprised. surprised. 'you are are too too young young to to have have been been at at school school with with mr. mr. henry henry spiker?' spiker?' 'oh, 'oh, i i don't don't mean mean him!' him!' i i returned. returned. 'i 'i mean mean the the gentleman gentleman named named traddles.' traddles.' 'oh! 'oh! aye, aye, aye! aye! indeed!' indeed!' said said my my host, host, with with much much diminished diminished interest. interest. 'possibly.' 'possibly.' 'if 'if it's it's really really the the same same person,' person,' said said i, i, glancing glancing towards towards him, him, 'it 'it was was at at a a place place called called salem salem house house where where we we were were together, together, and and he he was was an an excellent excellent fellow.' fellow.' 'oh 'oh yes. yes. traddles traddles is is a a good good fellow,' fellow,' returned returned my my host host nodding nodding his his head head with with an an air air of of toleration. toleration. 'traddles 'traddles is is quite quite a a good good fellow.' fellow.' 'it's 'it's a a curious curious coincidence,' coincidence,' said said i. i. 'it 'it is is really,' really,' returned returned my my host, host, 'quite 'quite a a coincidence, coincidence, that that traddles traddles should should be be here here at at all: all: as as traddles traddles was was only only invited invited this this morning, morning, when when the the place place at at table, table, intended intended to to be be occupied occupied by by mrs. mrs. henry henry spiker's spiker's brother, brother, became became vacant, vacant, in in consequence consequence of of his his indisposition. indisposition. a a very very gentlemanly gentlemanly man, man, mrs. mrs. henry henry spiker's spiker's brother, brother, mr. mr. copperfield.' copperfield.' i i murmured murmured an an assent, assent, which which was was full full of of feeling, feeling, considering considering that that i i knew knew nothing nothing at at all all about about him; him; and and i i inquired inquired what what mr. mr. traddles traddles was was by by profession. profession. 'traddles,' 'traddles,' returned returned mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, 'is 'is a a young young man man reading reading for for the the bar. bar. yes. yes. he he is is quite quite a a good good fellow fellow -- -- nobody's nobody's enemy enemy but but his his own.' own.' 'is 'is he he his his own own enemy?' enemy?' said said i, i, sorry sorry to to hear hear this. this. 'well,' 'well,' returned returned mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, pursing pursing up up his his mouth, mouth, and and playing playing with with his his watch-chain, watch-chain, in in a a comfortable, comfortable, prosperous prosperous sort sort of of way. way. 'i 'i should should say say he he was was one one of of those those men men who who stand stand in in their their own own light. light. yes, yes, i i should should say say he he would would never, never, for for example, example, be be worth worth five five hundred hundred pound. pound. traddles traddles was was recommended recommended to to me me by by a a professional professional friend. friend. oh oh yes. yes. yes. yes. he he has has a a kind kind of of talent talent for for drawing drawing briefs, briefs, and and stating stating a a case case in in writing, writing, plainly. plainly. i i am am able able to to throw throw something something in in traddles's traddles's way, way, in in the the course course of of the the year; year; something something -- -- for for him him -- -- considerable. considerable. oh oh yes. yes. yes.' yes.' i i was was much much impressed impressed by by the the extremely extremely comfortable comfortable and and satisfied satisfied manner manner in in which which mr. mr. waterbrook waterbrook delivered delivered himself himself of of this this little little word word 'yes', 'yes', every every now now and and then. then. there there was was wonderful wonderful expression expression in in it. it. it it completely completely conveyed conveyed the the idea idea of of a a man man who who had had been been born, born, not not to to say say with with a a silver silver spoon, spoon, but but with with a a scaling-ladder, scaling-ladder, and and had had gone gone on on mounting mounting all all the the heights heights of of life life one one after after another, another, until until now now he he looked, looked, from from the the top top of of the the fortifications, fortifications, with with the the eye eye of of a a philosopher philosopher and and a a patron, patron, on on the the people people down down in in the the trenches. trenches. my my reflections reflections on on this this theme theme were were still still in in progress progress when when dinner dinner was was announced. announced. mr. mr. waterbrook waterbrook went went down down with with hamlet's hamlet's aunt. aunt. mr. mr. henry henry spiker spiker took took mrs. mrs. waterbrook. waterbrook. agnes, agnes, whom whom i i should should have have liked liked to to take take myself, myself, was was given given to to a a simpering simpering fellow fellow with with weak weak legs. legs. uriah, uriah, traddles, traddles, and and i, i, as as the the junior junior part part of of the the company, company, went went down down last, last, how how we we could. could. i i was was not not so so vexed vexed at at losing losing agnes agnes as as i i might might have have been, been, since since it it gave gave me me an an opportunity opportunity of of making making myself myself known known to to traddles traddles on on the the stairs, stairs, who who greeted greeted me me with with great great fervour; fervour; while while uriah uriah writhed writhed with with such such obtrusive obtrusive satisfaction satisfaction and and self-abasement, self-abasement, that that i i could could gladly gladly have have pitched pitched him him over over the the banisters. banisters. traddles traddles and and i i were were separated separated at at table, table, being being billeted billeted in in two two remote remote corners: corners: he he in in the the glare glare of of a a red red velvet velvet lady; lady; i, i, in in the the gloom gloom of of hamlet's hamlet's aunt. aunt. the the dinner dinner was was very very long, long, and and the the conversation conversation was was about about the the aristocracy aristocracy -- -- and and blood. blood. mrs. mrs. waterbrook waterbrook repeatedly repeatedly told told us, us, that that if if she she had had a a weakness, weakness, it it was was blood. blood. it it occurred occurred to to me me several several times times that that we we should should have have got got on on better, better, if if we we had had not not been been quite quite so so genteel. genteel. we we were were so so exceedingly exceedingly genteel, genteel, that that our our scope scope was was very very limited. limited. a a mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. gulpidge gulpidge were were of of the the party, party, who who had had something something to to do do at at second-hand second-hand (at (at least, least, mr. mr. gulpidge gulpidge had) had) with with the the law law business business of of the the bank; bank; and and what what with with the the bank, bank, and and what what with with the the treasury, treasury, we we were were as as exclusive exclusive as as the the court court circular. circular. to to mend mend the the matter, matter, hamlet's hamlet's aunt aunt had had the the family family failing failing of of indulging indulging in in soliloquy, soliloquy, and and held held forth forth in in a a desultory desultory manner, manner, by by herself, herself, on on every every topic topic that that was was introduced. introduced. these these were were few few enough, enough, to to be be sure; sure; but but as as we we always always fell fell back back upon upon blood, blood, she she had had as as wide wide a a field field for for abstract abstract speculation speculation as as her her nephew nephew himself. himself. we we might might have have been been a a party party of of ogres, ogres, the the conversation conversation assumed assumed such such a a sanguine sanguine complexion. complexion. 'i 'i confess confess i i am am of of mrs. mrs. waterbrook's waterbrook's opinion,' opinion,' said said mr. mr. waterbrook, waterbrook, with with his his wine-glass wine-glass at at his his eye. eye. 'other 'other things things are are all all very very well well in in their their way, way, but but give give me me blood!' blood!' 'oh! 'oh! there there is is nothing,' nothing,' observed observed hamlet's hamlet's aunt, aunt, 'so 'so satisfactory satisfactory to to one! one! there there is is nothing nothing that that is is so so much much one's one's beau-ideal beau-ideal of of -- -- of of all all that that sort sort of of thing, thing, speaking speaking generally. generally. there there are are some some low low minds minds (not (not many, many, i i am am happy happy to to believe, believe, but but there there are are some) some) that that would would prefer prefer to to do do what what i i should should call call bow bow down down before before idols. idols. positively positively idols! idols! before before service, service, intellect, intellect, and and so so on. on. but but these these are are intangible intangible points. points. blood blood is is not not so. so. we we see see blood blood in in a a nose, nose, and and we we know know it. it. we we meet meet with with it it in in a a chin, chin, and and we we say, say, "there "there it it is! is! that's that's blood!" blood!" it it is is an an actual actual matter matter of of fact. fact. we we point point it it out. out. it it admits admits of of no no doubt.' doubt.' the the simpering simpering fellow fellow with with the the weak weak legs, legs, who who had had taken taken agnes agnes down, down, stated stated the the question question more more decisively decisively yet, yet, i i thought. thought. 'oh, 'oh, you know, know, deuce deuce take take it,' it,' said said this this gentleman, gentleman, looking looking round round the the board board with with an an imbecile imbecile smile, smile, 'we 'we can't can't forego forego blood, blood, you know. know. we we must must have have blood, blood, you know. know. some some young young fellows, fellows, you know, know, may may be be a a little little behind behind their their station, station, perhaps, perhaps, in in point point of of education education and and behaviour, behaviour, and and may may go go a a little little wrong, wrong, you know, know, and and get get themselves themselves and and other other people people into into a a variety variety of of fixes fixes -- -- and and all all that that -- -- but but deuce deuce take take it, it, it's it's delightful delightful to to reflect reflect that that they've they've got got blood blood in in 'em! 'em! myself, myself, i'd i'd rather rather at at any any time time be be knocked knocked down down by by a a man man who who had had got got blood blood in in him, him, than than i'd i'd be be picked picked up up by by a a man man who who hadn't!' hadn't!' this this sentiment, sentiment, as as compressing compressing the the general general question question into into a a nutshell, nutshell, gave gave the the utmost utmost satisfaction, satisfaction, and and brought brought the the gentleman gentleman into into great great notice notice until until the the ladies ladies retired. retired. after after that, that, i i observed observed that that mr. mr. gulpidge gulpidge and and mr. mr. henry henry spiker, spiker, who who had had hitherto hitherto been been very very distant, distant, entered entered into into a a defensive defensive alliance alliance against against us, us, the the common common enemy, enemy, and and exchanged exchanged a a mysterious mysterious dialogue dialogue across across the the table table for for our our defeat defeat and and overthrow. overthrow. 'that 'that affair affair of of the the first first bond bond for for four four thousand thousand five five hundred hundred pounds pounds has has not not taken taken the the course course that that was was expected, expected, spiker,' spiker,' said said mr. mr. gulpidge. gulpidge. 'do 'do you mean mean the the d. d. of of a.'s?' a.'s?' said said mr. mr. spiker. spiker. 'the 'the c. c. of of b.'s!' b.'s!' said said mr. mr. gulpidge. gulpidge. mr. mr. spiker spiker raised raised his his eyebrows, eyebrows, and and looked looked much much concerned. concerned. 'when 'when the the question question was was referred referred to to lord lord -- -- i i needn't needn't name name him,' him,' said said mr. mr. gulpidge, gulpidge, checking checking himself himself -- -- 'i 'i understand,' understand,' said said mr. mr. spiker, spiker, 'n.' 'n.' mr. mr. gulpidge gulpidge darkly darkly nodded nodded -- -- 'was 'was referred referred to to him, him, his his answer answer was, was, "money, "money, or or no no release."' release."' 'lord 'lord bless bless my my soul!' soul!' cried cried mr. mr. spiker. spiker. "'money, "'money, or or no no release,"' release,"' repeated repeated mr. mr. gulpidge, gulpidge, firmly. firmly. 'the 'the next next in in reversion reversion -- -- you understand understand me?' me?' 'k.,' 'k.,' said said mr. mr. spiker, spiker, with with an an ominous ominous look. look. ' ' -- -- k. k. then then positively positively refused refused to to sign. sign. he he was was attended attended at at newmarket newmarket for for that that purpose, purpose, and and he he point-blank point-blank refused refused to to do do it.' it.' mr. mr. spiker spiker was was so so interested, interested, that that he he became became quite quite stony. stony. 'so 'so the the matter matter rests rests at at this this hour,' hour,' said said mr. mr. gulpidge, gulpidge, throwing throwing himself himself back back in in his his chair. chair. 'our 'our friend friend waterbrook waterbrook will will excuse excuse me me if if i i forbear forbear to to explain explain myself myself generally, generally, on on account account of of the the magnitude magnitude of of the the interests interests involved.' involved.' mr. mr. waterbrook waterbrook was was only only too too happy, happy, as as it it appeared appeared to to me, me, to to have have such such interests, interests, and and such such names, names, even even hinted hinted at, at, across across his his table. table. he he assumed assumed an an expression expression of of gloomy gloomy intelligence intelligence (though (though i i am am persuaded persuaded he he knew knew no no more more about about the the discussion discussion than than i i did), did), and and highly highly approved approved of of the the discretion discretion that that had had been been observed. observed. mr. mr. spiker, spiker, after after the the receipt receipt of of such such a a confidence, confidence, naturally naturally desired desired to to favour favour his his friend friend with with a a confidence confidence of of his his own; own; therefore therefore the the foregoing foregoing dialogue dialogue was was succeeded succeeded by by another, another, in in which which it it was was mr. mr. gulpidge's gulpidge's turn turn to to be be surprised, surprised, and and that that by by another another in in which which the the surprise surprise came came round round to to mr. mr. spiker's spiker's turn turn again, again, and and so so on, on, turn turn and and turn turn about. about. all all this this time time we, we, the the outsiders, outsiders, remained remained oppressed oppressed by by the the tremendous tremendous interests interests involved involved in in the the conversation; conversation; and and our our host host regarded regarded us us with with pride, pride, as as the the victims victims of of a a salutary salutary awe awe and and astonishment. astonishment. i i was was very very glad glad indeed indeed to to get get upstairs upstairs to to agnes, agnes, and and to to talk talk with with her her in in a a corner, corner, and and to to introduce introduce traddles traddles to to her, her, who who was was shy, shy, but but agreeable, agreeable, and and the the same same good-natured good-natured creature creature still. still. as as he he was was obliged obliged to to leave leave early, early, on on account account of of going going away away next next morning morning for for a a month, month, i i had had not not nearly nearly so so much much conversation conversation with with him him as as i i could could have have wished; wished; but but we we exchanged exchanged addresses, addresses, and and promised promised ourselves ourselves the the pleasure pleasure of of another another meeting meeting when when he he should should come come back back to to town. town. he he was was greatly greatly interested interested to to hear hear that that i i knew knew steerforth, steerforth, and and spoke spoke of of him him with with such such warmth warmth that that i i made made him him tell tell agnes agnes what what he he thought thought of of him. him. but but agnes agnes only only looked looked at at me me the the while, while, and and very very slightly slightly shook shook her her head head when when only only i i observed observed her. her. as as she she was was not not among among people people with with whom whom i i believed believed she she could could be be very very much much at at home, home, i i was was almost almost glad glad to to hear hear that that she she was was going going away away within within a a few few days, days, though though i i was was sorry sorry at at the the prospect prospect of of parting parting from from her her again again so so soon. soon. this this caused caused me me to to remain remain until until all all the the company company were were gone. gone. conversing conversing with with her, her, and and hearing hearing her her sing, sing, was was such such a a delightful delightful reminder reminder to to me me of of my my happy happy life life in in the the grave grave old old house house she she had had made made so so beautiful, beautiful, that that i i could could have have remained remained there there half half the the night; night; but, but, having having no no excuse excuse for for staying staying any any longer, longer, when when the the lights lights of of mr. mr. waterbrook's waterbrook's society society were were all all snuffed snuffed out, out, i i took took my my leave leave very very much much against against my my inclination. inclination. i i felt felt then, then, more more than than ever, ever, that that she she was was my my better better angel; angel; and and if if i i thought thought of of her her sweet sweet face face and and placid placid smile, smile, as as though though they they had had shone shone on on me me from from some some removed removed being, being, like like an an angel, angel, i i hope hope i i thought thought no no harm. harm. i i have have said said that that the the company company were were all all gone; gone; but but i i ought ought to to have have excepted excepted uriah, uriah, whom whom i i don't don't include include in in that that denomination, denomination, and and who who had had never never ceased ceased to to hover hover near near us. us. he he was was close close behind behind me me when when i i went went downstairs. downstairs. he he was was close close beside beside me, me, when when i i walked walked away away from from the the house, house, slowly slowly fitting fitting his his long long skeleton skeleton fingers fingers into into the the still still longer longer fingers fingers of of a a great great guy guy fawkes fawkes pair pair of of gloves. gloves. it it was was in in no no disposition disposition for for uriah's uriah's company, company, but but in in remembrance remembrance of of the the entreaty entreaty agnes agnes had had made made to to me, me, that that i i asked asked him him if if he he would would come come home home to to my my rooms, rooms, and and have have some some coffee. coffee. 'oh, 'oh, really, really, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he rejoined rejoined -- -- 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, mister mister copperfield, copperfield, but but the the other other comes comes so so natural, natural, i i don't don't like like that that you should should put put a a constraint constraint upon upon yourself yourself to to ask ask a a numble numble person person like like me me to to your your ouse.' ouse.' 'there 'there is is no no constraint constraint in in the the case,' case,' said said i. i. 'will 'will you come?' come?' 'i 'i should should like like to, to, very very much,' much,' replied replied uriah, uriah, with with a a writhe. writhe. 'well, 'well, then, then, come come along!' along!' said said i. i. i i could could not not help help being being rather rather short short with with him, him, but but he he appeared appeared not not to to mind mind it. it. we we went went the the nearest nearest way, way, without without conversing conversing much much upon upon the the road; road; and and he he was was so so humble humble in in respect respect of of those those scarecrow scarecrow gloves, gloves, that that he he was was still still putting putting them them on, on, and and seemed seemed to to have have made made no no advance advance in in that that labour, labour, when when we we got got to to my my place. place. i i led led him him up up the the dark dark stairs, stairs, to to prevent prevent his his knocking knocking his his head head against against anything, anything, and and really really his his damp damp cold cold hand hand felt felt so so like like a a frog frog in in mine, mine, that that i i was was tempted tempted to to drop drop it it and and run run away. away. agnes agnes and and hospitality hospitality prevailed, prevailed, however, however, and and i i conducted conducted him him to to my my fireside. fireside. when when i i lighted lighted my my candles, candles, he he fell fell into into meek meek transports transports with with the the room room that that was was revealed revealed to to him; him; and and when when i i heated heated the the coffee coffee in in an an unassuming unassuming block-tin block-tin vessel vessel in in which which mrs. mrs. crupp crupp delighted delighted to to prepare prepare it it (chiefly, (chiefly, i i believe, believe, because because it it was was not not intended intended for for the the purpose, purpose, being being a a shaving-pot, shaving-pot, and and because because there there was was a a patent patent invention invention of of great great price price mouldering mouldering away away in in the the pantry), pantry), he he professed professed so so much much emotion, emotion, that that i i could could joyfully joyfully have have scalded scalded him. him. 'oh, 'oh, really, really, master master copperfield, copperfield, -- -- i i mean mean mister mister copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, 'to 'to see see you waiting waiting upon upon me me is is what what i i never never could could have have expected! expected! but, but, one one way way and and another, another, so so many many things things happen happen to to me me which which i i never never could could have have expected, expected, i i am am sure, sure, in in my my umble umble station, station, that that it it seems seems to to rain rain blessings blessings on on my my ed. ed. you have have heard heard something, something, i i des-say, des-say, of of a a change change in in my my expectations, expectations, master master copperfield, copperfield, -- -- i i should should say, say, mister mister copperfield?' copperfield?' as as he he sat sat on on my my sofa, sofa, with with his his long long knees knees drawn drawn up up under under his his coffee-cup, coffee-cup, his his hat hat and and gloves gloves upon upon the the ground ground close close to to him, him, his his spoon spoon going going softly softly round round and and round, round, his his shadowless shadowless red red eyes, eyes, which which looked looked as as if if they they had had scorched scorched their their lashes lashes off, off, turned turned towards towards me me without without looking looking at at me, me, the the disagreeable disagreeable dints dints i i have have formerly formerly described described in in his his nostrils nostrils coming coming and and going going with with his his breath, breath, and and a a snaky snaky undulation undulation pervading pervading his his frame frame from from his his chin chin to to his his boots, boots, i i decided decided in in my my own own mind mind that that i i disliked disliked him him intensely. intensely. it it made made me me very very uncomfortable uncomfortable to to have have him him for for a a guest, guest, for for i i was was young young then, then, and and unused unused to to disguise disguise what what i i so so strongly strongly felt. felt. 'you have have heard heard something, something, i i des-say, des-say, of of a a change change in in my my expectations, expectations, master master copperfield, copperfield, -- -- i i should should say, say, mister mister copperfield?' copperfield?' observed observed uriah. uriah. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i, i, 'something.' 'something.' 'ah! 'ah! i i thought thought miss miss agnes agnes would would know know of of it!' it!' he he quietly quietly returned. returned. 'i'm 'i'm glad glad to to find find miss miss agnes agnes knows knows of of it. it. oh, oh, thank thank you, master master -- -- mister mister copperfield!' copperfield!' i i could could have have thrown thrown my my bootjack bootjack at at him him (it (it lay lay ready ready on on the the rug), rug), for for having having entrapped entrapped me me into into the the disclosure disclosure of of anything anything concerning concerning agnes, agnes, however however immaterial. immaterial. but but i i only only drank drank my my coffee. coffee. 'what 'what a a prophet prophet you have have shown shown yourself, yourself, mister mister copperfield!' copperfield!' pursued pursued uriah. uriah. 'dear 'dear me, me, what what a a prophet prophet you have have proved proved yourself yourself to to be! be! don't don't you remember remember saying saying to to me me once, once, that that perhaps perhaps i i should should be be a a partner partner in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's business, business, and and perhaps perhaps it it might might be be wickfield wickfield and and heep? heep? you may may not not recollect recollect it; it; but but when when a a person person is is umble, umble, master master copperfield, copperfield, a a person person treasures treasures such such things things up!' up!' 'i 'i recollect recollect talking talking about about it,' it,' said said i, i, 'though 'though i i certainly certainly did did not not think think it it very very likely likely then.' then.' 'oh! 'oh! who who would would have have thought thought it it likely, likely, mister mister copperfield!' copperfield!' returned returned uriah, uriah, enthusiastically. enthusiastically. 'i 'i am am sure sure i i didn't didn't myself. myself. i i recollect recollect saying saying with with my my own own lips lips that that i i was was much much too too umble. umble. so so i i considered considered myself myself really really and and truly.' truly.' he he sat, sat, with with that that carved carved grin grin on on his his face, face, looking looking at at the the fire, fire, as as i i looked looked at at him. him. 'but 'but the the umblest umblest persons, persons, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he presently presently resumed, resumed, 'may 'may be be the the instruments instruments of of good. good. i i am am glad glad to to think think i i have have been been the the instrument instrument of of good good to to mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, and and that that i i may may be be more more so. so. oh oh what what a a worthy worthy man man he he is, is, mister mister copperfield, copperfield, but but how how imprudent imprudent he he has has been!' been!' 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to hear hear it,' it,' said said i. i. i i could could not not help help adding, adding, rather rather pointedly, pointedly, 'on 'on all all accounts.' accounts.' 'decidedly 'decidedly so, so, mister mister copperfield,' copperfield,' replied replied uriah. uriah. 'on 'on all all accounts. accounts. miss miss agnes's agnes's above above all! all! you don't don't remember remember your your own own eloquent eloquent expressions, expressions, master master copperfield; copperfield; but but i i remember remember how how you said said one one day day that that everybody everybody must must admire admire her, her, and and how how i i thanked thanked you for for it! it! you have have forgot forgot that, that, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' 'no,' 'no,' said said i, i, drily. drily. 'oh 'oh how how glad glad i i am am you have have not!' not!' exclaimed exclaimed uriah. uriah. 'to 'to think think that that you should should be be the the first first to to kindle kindle the the sparks sparks of of ambition ambition in in my my umble umble breast, breast, and and that that you've you've not not forgot forgot it! it! oh! oh! -- -- would would you excuse excuse me me asking asking for for a a cup cup more more coffee?' coffee?' something something in in the the emphasis emphasis he he laid laid upon upon the the kindling kindling of of those those sparks, sparks, and and something something in in the the glance glance he he directed directed at at me me as as he he said said it, it, had had made made me me start start as as if if i i had had seen seen him him illuminated illuminated by by a a blaze blaze of of light. light. recalled recalled by by his his request, request, preferred preferred in in quite quite another another tone tone of of voice, voice, i i did did the the honours honours of of the the shaving-pot; shaving-pot; but but i i did did them them with with an an unsteadiness unsteadiness of of hand, hand, a a sudden sudden sense sense of of being being no no match match for for him, him, and and a a perplexed perplexed suspicious suspicious anxiety anxiety as as to to what what he he might might be be going going to to say say next, next, which which i i felt felt could could not not escape escape his his observation. observation. he he said said nothing nothing at at all. all. he he stirred stirred his his coffee coffee round round and and round, round, he he sipped sipped it, it, he he felt felt his his chin chin softly softly with with his his grisly grisly hand, hand, he he looked looked at at the the fire, fire, he he looked looked about about the the room, room, he he gasped gasped rather rather than than smiled smiled at at me, me, he he writhed writhed and and undulated undulated about, about, in in his his deferential deferential servility, servility, he he stirred stirred and and sipped sipped again, again, but but he he left left the the renewal renewal of of the the conversation conversation to to me. me. 'so, 'so, mr. mr. wickfield,' wickfield,' said said i, i, at at last, last, 'who 'who is is worth worth five five hundred hundred of of you -- -- or or me'; me'; for for my my life, life, i i think, think, i i could could not not have have helped helped dividing dividing that that part part of of the the sentence sentence with with an an awkward awkward jerk; jerk; 'has 'has been been imprudent, imprudent, has has he, he, mr. mr. heep?' heep?' 'oh, 'oh, very very imprudent imprudent indeed, indeed, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned uriah, uriah, sighing sighing modestly. modestly. 'oh, 'oh, very very much much so! so! but but i i wish wish you'd you'd call call me me uriah, uriah, if if you please. please. it's it's like like old old times.' times.' 'well! 'well! uriah,' uriah,' said said i, i, bolting bolting it it out out with with some some difficulty. difficulty. 'thank 'thank you,' he he returned, returned, with with fervour. fervour. 'thank 'thank you, master master copperfield! copperfield! it's it's like like the the blowing blowing of of old old breezes breezes or or the the ringing ringing of of old old bellses bellses to to hear hear you say say uriah. uriah. i i beg beg your your pardon. pardon. was was i i making making any any observation?' observation?' 'about 'about mr. mr. wickfield,' wickfield,' i i suggested. suggested. 'oh! 'oh! yes, yes, truly,' truly,' said said uriah. uriah. 'ah! 'ah! great great imprudence, imprudence, master master copperfield. copperfield. it's it's a a topic topic that that i i wouldn't wouldn't touch touch upon, upon, to to any any soul soul but but you. even even to to you i i can can only only touch touch upon upon it, it, and and no no more. more. if if anyone anyone else else had had been been in in my my place place during during the the last last few few years, years, by by this this time time he he would would have have had had mr. mr. wickfield wickfield (oh, (oh, what what a a worthy worthy man man he he is, is, master master copperfield, copperfield, too!) too!) under under his his thumb. thumb. un un -- -- der der -- -- his his thumb,' thumb,' said said uriah, uriah, very very slowly, slowly, as as he he stretched stretched out out his his cruel-looking cruel-looking hand hand above above my my table, table, and and pressed pressed his his own own thumb thumb upon upon it, it, until until it it shook, shook, and and shook shook the the room. room. if if i i had had been been obliged obliged to to look look at at him him with with him him splay splay foot foot on on mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's head, head, i i think think i i could could scarcely scarcely have have hated hated him him more. more. 'oh, 'oh, dear, dear, yes, yes, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he proceeded, proceeded, in in a a soft soft voice, voice, most most remarkably remarkably contrasting contrasting with with the the action action of of his his thumb, thumb, which which did did not not diminish diminish its its hard hard pressure pressure in in the the least least degree, degree, 'there's 'there's no no doubt doubt of of it. it. there there would would have have been been loss, loss, disgrace, disgrace, i i don't don't know know what what at at all. all. mr. mr. wickfield wickfield knows knows it. it. i i am am the the umble umble instrument instrument of of umbly umbly serving serving him, him, and and he he puts puts me me on on an an eminence eminence i i hardly hardly could could have have hoped hoped to to reach. reach. how how thankful thankful should should i i be!' be!' with with his his face face turned turned towards towards me, me, as as he he finished, finished, but but without without looking looking at at me, me, he he took took his his crooked crooked thumb thumb off off the the spot spot where where he he had had planted planted it, it, and and slowly slowly and and thoughtfully thoughtfully scraped scraped his his lank lank jaw jaw with with it, it, as as if if he he were were shaving shaving himself. himself. i i recollect recollect well well how how indignantly indignantly my my heart heart beat, beat, as as i i saw saw his his crafty crafty face, face, with with the the appropriately appropriately red red light light of of the the fire fire upon upon it, it, preparing preparing for for something something else. else. 'master 'master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he began began -- -- 'but 'but am am i i keeping keeping you up?' up?' 'you are are not not keeping keeping me me up. up. i i generally generally go go to to bed bed late.' late.' 'thank 'thank you, master master copperfield! copperfield! i i have have risen risen from from my my umble umble station station since since first first you used used to to address address me, me, it it is is true; true; but but i i am am umble umble still. still. i i hope hope i i never never shall shall be be otherwise otherwise than than umble. umble. you will will not not think think the the worse worse of of my my umbleness, umbleness, if if i i make make a a little little confidence confidence to to you, master master copperfield? copperfield? will will you?' 'oh 'oh no,' no,' said said i, i, with with an an effort. effort. 'thank 'thank you!' he he took took out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and began began wiping wiping the the palms palms of of his his hands. hands. 'miss 'miss agnes, agnes, master master copperfield copperfield -- -- ' ' 'well, 'well, uriah?' uriah?' 'oh, 'oh, how how pleasant pleasant to to be be called called uriah, uriah, spontaneously!' spontaneously!' he he cried; cried; and and gave gave himself himself a a jerk, jerk, like like a a convulsive convulsive fish. fish. 'you thought thought her her looking looking very very beautiful beautiful tonight, tonight, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' 'i 'i thought thought her her looking looking as as she she always always does: does: superior, superior, in in all all respects, respects, to to everyone everyone around around her,' her,' i i returned. returned. 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you! it's it's so so true!' true!' he he cried. cried. 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you very very much much for for that!' that!' 'not 'not at at all,' all,' i i said, said, loftily. loftily. 'there 'there is is no no reason reason why why you should should thank thank me.' me.' 'why 'why that, that, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, 'is, 'is, in in fact, fact, the the confidence confidence that that i i am am going going to to take take the the liberty liberty of of reposing. reposing. umble umble as as i i am,' am,' he he wiped wiped his his hands hands harder, harder, and and looked looked at at them them and and at at the the fire fire by by turns, turns, 'umble 'umble as as my my mother mother is, is, and and lowly lowly as as our our poor poor but but honest honest roof roof has has ever ever been, been, the the image image of of miss miss agnes agnes (i (i don't don't mind mind trusting trusting you with with my my secret, secret, master master copperfield, copperfield, for for i i have have always always overflowed overflowed towards towards you since since the the first first moment moment i i had had the the pleasure pleasure of of beholding beholding you in in a a pony-shay) pony-shay) has has been been in in my my breast breast for for years. years. oh, oh, master master copperfield, copperfield, with with what what a a pure pure affection affection do do i i love love the the ground ground my my agnes agnes walks walks on!' on!' i i believe believe i i had had a a delirious delirious idea idea of of seizing seizing the the red-hot red-hot poker poker out out of of the the fire, fire, and and running running him him through through with with it. it. it it went went from from me me with with a a shock, shock, like like a a ball ball fired fired from from a a rifle: rifle: but but the the image image of of agnes, agnes, outraged outraged by by so so much much as as a a thought thought of of this this red-headed red-headed animal's, animal's, remained remained in in my my mind mind when when i i looked looked at at him, him, sitting sitting all all awry awry as as if if his his mean mean soul soul griped griped his his body, body, and and made made me me giddy. giddy. he he seemed seemed to to swell swell and and grow grow before before my my eyes; eyes; the the room room seemed seemed full full of of the the echoes echoes of of his his voice; voice; and and the the strange strange feeling feeling (to (to which, which, perhaps, perhaps, no no one one is is quite quite a a stranger) stranger) that that all all this this had had occurred occurred before, before, at at some some indefinite indefinite time, time, and and that that i i knew knew what what he he was was going going to to say say next, next, took took possession possession of of me. me. a a timely timely observation observation of of the the sense sense of of power power that that there there was was in in his his face, face, did did more more to to bring bring back back to to my my remembrance remembrance the the entreaty entreaty of of agnes, agnes, in in its its full full force, force, than than any any effort effort i i could could have have made. made. i i asked asked him, him, with with a a better better appearance appearance of of composure composure than than i i could could have have thought thought possible possible a a minute minute before, before, whether whether he he had had made made his his feelings feelings known known to to agnes. agnes. 'oh 'oh no, no, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' he he returned; returned; 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no! no! not not to to anyone anyone but but you. you see see i i am am only only just just emerging emerging from from my my lowly lowly station. station. i i rest rest a a good good deal deal of of hope hope on on her her observing observing how how useful useful i i am am to to her her father father (for (for i i trust trust to to be be very very useful useful to to him him indeed, indeed, master master copperfield), copperfield), and and how how i i smooth smooth the the way way for for him, him, and and keep keep him him straight. straight. she's she's so so much much attached attached to to her her father, father, master master copperfield copperfield (oh, (oh, what what a a lovely lovely thing thing it it is is in in a a daughter!), daughter!), that that i i think think she she may may come, come, on on his his account, account, to to be be kind kind to to me.' me.' i i fathomed fathomed the the depth depth of of the the rascal's rascal's whole whole scheme, scheme, and and understood understood why why he he laid laid it it bare. bare. 'if 'if you'll you'll have have the the goodness goodness to to keep keep my my secret, secret, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he pursued, pursued, 'and 'and not, not, in in general, general, to to go go against against me, me, i i shall shall take take it it as as a a particular particular favour. favour. you wouldn't wouldn't wish wish to to make make unpleasantness. unpleasantness. i i know know what what a a friendly friendly heart heart you've you've got; got; but but having having only only known known me me on on my my umble umble footing footing (on (on my my umblest umblest i i should should say, say, for for i i am am very very umble umble still), still), you might, might, unbeknown, unbeknown, go go against against me me rather, rather, with with my my agnes. agnes. i i call call her her mine, mine, you see, see, master master copperfield. copperfield. there's there's a a song song that that says, says, "i'd "i'd crowns crowns resign, resign, to to call call her her mine!" mine!" i i hope hope to to do do it, it, one one of of these these days.' days.' dear dear agnes! agnes! so so much much too too loving loving and and too too good good for for anyone anyone that that i i could could think think of, of, was was it it possible possible that that she she was was reserved reserved to to be be the the wife wife of of such such a a wretch wretch as as this! this! 'there's 'there's no no hurry hurry at at present, present, you know, know, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' uriah uriah proceeded, proceeded, in in his his slimy slimy way, way, as as i i sat sat gazing gazing at at him, him, with with this this thought thought in in my my mind. mind. 'my 'my agnes agnes is is very very young young still; still; and and mother mother and and me me will will have have to to work work our our way way upwards, upwards, and and make make a a good good many many new new arrangements, arrangements, before before it it would would be be quite quite convenient. convenient. so so i i shall shall have have time time gradually gradually to to make make her her familiar familiar with with my my hopes, hopes, as as opportunities opportunities offer. offer. oh, oh, i'm i'm so so much much obliged obliged to to you for for this this confidence! confidence! oh, oh, it's it's such such a a relief, relief, you can't can't think, think, to to know know that that you understand understand our our situation, situation, and and are are certain certain (as (as you wouldn't wouldn't wish wish to to make make unpleasantness unpleasantness in in the the family) family) not not to to go go against against me!' me!' he he took took the the hand hand which which i i dared dared not not withhold, withhold, and and having having given given it it a a damp damp squeeze, squeeze, referred referred to to his his pale-faced pale-faced watch. watch. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' he he said, said, 'it's 'it's past past one. one. the the moments moments slip slip away away so, so, in in the the confidence confidence of of old old times, times, master master copperfield, copperfield, that that it's it's almost almost half half past past one!' one!' i i answered answered that that i i had had thought thought it it was was later. later. not not that that i i had had really really thought thought so, so, but but because because my my conversational conversational powers powers were were effectually effectually scattered. scattered. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' he he said, said, considering. considering. 'the 'the ouse ouse that that i i am am stopping stopping at at -- -- a a sort sort of of a a private private hotel hotel and and boarding boarding ouse, ouse, master master copperfield, copperfield, near near the the new new river river ed ed -- -- will will have have gone gone to to bed bed these these two two hours.' hours.' 'i 'i am am sorry,' sorry,' i i returned, returned, 'that 'that there there is is only only one one bed bed here, here, and and that that i i -- -- ' ' 'oh, 'oh, don't don't think think of of mentioning mentioning beds, beds, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' he he rejoined rejoined ecstatically, ecstatically, drawing drawing up up one one leg. leg. 'but 'but would would you have have any any objections objections to to my my laying laying down down before before the the fire?' fire?' 'if 'if it it comes comes to to that,' that,' i i said, said, 'pray 'pray take take my my bed, bed, and and i'll i'll lie lie down down before before the the fire.' fire.' his his repudiation repudiation of of this this offer offer was was almost almost shrill shrill enough, enough, in in the the excess excess of of its its surprise surprise and and humility, humility, to to have have penetrated penetrated to to the the ears ears of of mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, then then sleeping, sleeping, i i suppose, suppose, in in a a distant distant chamber, chamber, situated situated at at about about the the level level of of low-water low-water mark, mark, soothed soothed in in her her slumbers slumbers by by the the ticking ticking of of an an incorrigible incorrigible clock, clock, to to which which she she always always referred referred me me when when we we had had any any little little difference difference on on the the score score of of punctuality, punctuality, and and which which was was never never less less than than three-quarters three-quarters of of an an hour hour too too slow, slow, and and had had always always been been put put right right in in the the morning morning by by the the best best authorities. authorities. as as no no arguments arguments i i could could urge, urge, in in my my bewildered bewildered condition, condition, had had the the least least effect effect upon upon his his modesty modesty in in inducing inducing him him to to accept accept my my bedroom, bedroom, i i was was obliged obliged to to make make the the best best arrangements arrangements i i could, could, for for his his repose repose before before the the fire. fire. the the mattress mattress of of the the sofa sofa (which (which was was a a great great deal deal too too short short for for his his lank lank figure), figure), the the sofa sofa pillows, pillows, a a blanket, blanket, the the table-cover, table-cover, a a clean clean breakfast-cloth, breakfast-cloth, and and a a great-coat, great-coat, made made him him a a bed bed and and covering, covering, for for which which he he was was more more than than thankful. thankful. having having lent lent him him a a night-cap, night-cap, which which he he put put on on at at once, once, and and in in which which he he made made such such an an awful awful figure, figure, that that i i have have never never worn worn one one since, since, i i left left him him to to his his rest. rest. i i never never shall shall forget forget that that night. night. i i never never shall shall forget forget how how i i turned turned and and tumbled; tumbled; how how i i wearied wearied myself myself with with thinking thinking about about agnes agnes and and this this creature; creature; how how i i considered considered what what could could i i do, do, and and what what ought ought i i to to do; do; how how i i could could come come to to no no other other conclusion conclusion than than that that the the best best course course for for her her peace peace was was to to do do nothing, nothing, and and to to keep keep to to myself myself what what i i had had heard. heard. if if i i went went to to sleep sleep for for a a few few moments, moments, the the image image of of agnes agnes with with her her tender tender eyes, eyes, and and of of her her father father looking looking fondly fondly on on her, her, as as i i had had so so often often seen seen him him look, look, arose arose before before me me with with appealing appealing faces, faces, and and filled filled me me with with vague vague terrors. terrors. when when i i awoke, awoke, the the recollection recollection that that uriah uriah was was lying lying in in the the next next room, room, sat sat heavy heavy on on me me like like a a waking waking nightmare; nightmare; and and oppressed oppressed me me with with a a leaden leaden dread, dread, as as if if i i had had had had some some meaner meaner quality quality of of devil devil for for a a lodger. lodger. the the poker poker got got into into my my dozing dozing thoughts thoughts besides, besides, and and wouldn't wouldn't come come out. out. i i thought, thought, between between sleeping sleeping and and waking, waking, that that it it was was still still red red hot, hot, and and i i had had snatched snatched it it out out of of the the fire, fire, and and run run him him through through the the body. body. i i was was so so haunted haunted at at last last by by the the idea, idea, though though i i knew knew there there was was nothing nothing in in it, it, that that i i stole stole into into the the next next room room to to look look at at him. him. there there i i saw saw him, him, lying lying on on his his back, back, with with his his legs legs extending extending to to i i don't don't know know where, where, gurglings gurglings taking taking place place in in his his throat, throat, stoppages stoppages in in his his nose, nose, and and his his mouth mouth open open like like a a post-office. post-office. he he was was so so much much worse worse in in reality reality than than in in my my distempered distempered fancy, fancy, that that afterwards afterwards i i was was attracted attracted to to him him in in very very repulsion, repulsion, and and could could not not help help wandering wandering in in and and out out every every half-hour half-hour or or so, so, and and taking taking another another look look at at him. him. still, still, the the long, long, long long night night seemed seemed heavy heavy and and hopeless hopeless as as ever, ever, and and no no promise promise of of day day was was in in the the murky murky sky. sky. when when i i saw saw him him going going downstairs downstairs early early in in the the morning morning (for, (for, thank thank heaven! heaven! he he would would not not stay stay to to breakfast), breakfast), it it appeared appeared to to me me as as if if the the night night was was going going away away in in his his person. person. when when i i went went out out to to the the commons, commons, i i charged charged mrs. mrs. crupp crupp with with particular particular directions directions to to leave leave the the windows windows open, open, that that my my sitting-room sitting-room might might be be aired, aired, and and purged purged of of his his presence. presence. chapter chapter 26. 26. i i fall fall into into captivity captivity i i saw saw no no more more of of uriah uriah heep, heep, until until the the day day when when agnes agnes left left town. town. i i was was at at the the coach coach office office to to take take leave leave of of her her and and see see her her go; go; and and there there was was he, he, returning returning to to canterbury canterbury by by the the same same conveyance. conveyance. it it was was some some small small satisfaction satisfaction to to me me to to observe observe his his spare, spare, short-waisted, short-waisted, high-shouldered, high-shouldered, mulberry-coloured mulberry-coloured great-coat great-coat perched perched up, up, in in company company with with an an umbrella umbrella like like a a small small tent, tent, on on the the edge edge of of the the back back seat seat on on the the roof, roof, while while agnes agnes was, was, of of course, course, inside; inside; but but what what i i underwent underwent in in my my efforts efforts to to be be friendly friendly with with him, him, while while agnes agnes looked looked on, on, perhaps perhaps deserved deserved that that little little recompense. recompense. at at the the coach coach window, window, as as at at the the dinner-party, dinner-party, he he hovered hovered about about us us without without a a moment's moment's intermission, intermission, like like a a great great vulture: vulture: gorging gorging himself himself on on every every syllable syllable that that i i said said to to agnes, agnes, or or agnes agnes said said to to me. me. in in the the state state of of trouble trouble into into which which his his disclosure disclosure by by my my fire fire had had thrown thrown me, me, i i had had thought thought very very much much of of the the words words agnes agnes had had used used in in reference reference to to the the partnership. partnership. 'i 'i did did what what i i hope hope was was right. right. feeling feeling sure sure that that it it was was necessary necessary for for papa's papa's peace peace that that the the sacrifice sacrifice should should be be made, made, i i entreated entreated him him to to make make it.' it.' a a miserable miserable foreboding foreboding that that she she would would yield yield to, to, and and sustain sustain herself herself by, by, the the same same feeling feeling in in reference reference to to any any sacrifice sacrifice for for his his sake, sake, had had oppressed oppressed me me ever ever since. since. i i knew knew how how she she loved loved him. him. i i knew knew what what the the devotion devotion of of her her nature nature was. was. i i knew knew from from her her own own lips lips that that she she regarded regarded herself herself as as the the innocent innocent cause cause of of his his errors, errors, and and as as owing owing him him a a great great debt debt she she ardently ardently desired desired to to pay. pay. i i had had no no consolation consolation in in seeing seeing how how different different she she was was from from this this detestable detestable rufus rufus with with the the mulberry-coloured mulberry-coloured great-coat, great-coat, for for i i felt felt that that in in the the very very difference difference between between them, them, in in the the self-denial self-denial of of her her pure pure soul soul and and the the sordid sordid baseness baseness of of his, his, the the greatest greatest danger danger lay. lay. all all this, this, doubtless, doubtless, he he knew knew thoroughly, thoroughly, and and had, had, in in his his cunning, cunning, considered considered well. well. yet yet i i was was so so certain certain that that the the prospect prospect of of such such a a sacrifice sacrifice afar afar off, off, must must destroy destroy the the happiness happiness of of agnes; agnes; and and i i was was so so sure, sure, from from her her manner, manner, of of its its being being unseen unseen by by her her then, then, and and having having cast cast no no shadow shadow on on her her yet; yet; that that i i could could as as soon soon have have injured injured her, her, as as given given her her any any warning warning of of what what impended. impended. thus thus it it was was that that we we parted parted without without explanation: explanation: she she waving waving her her hand hand and and smiling smiling farewell farewell from from the the coach coach window; window; her her evil evil genius genius writhing writhing on on the the roof, roof, as as if if he he had had her her in in his his clutches clutches and and triumphed. triumphed. i i could could not not get get over over this this farewell farewell glimpse glimpse of of them them for for a a long long time. time. when when agnes agnes wrote wrote to to tell tell me me of of her her safe safe arrival, arrival, i i was was as as miserable miserable as as when when i i saw saw her her going going away. away. whenever whenever i i fell fell into into a a thoughtful thoughtful state, state, this this subject subject was was sure sure to to present present itself, itself, and and all all my my uneasiness uneasiness was was sure sure to to be be redoubled. redoubled. hardly hardly a a night night passed passed without without my my dreaming dreaming of of it. it. it it became became a a part part of of my my life, life, and and as as inseparable inseparable from from my my life life as as my my own own head. head. i i had had ample ample leisure leisure to to refine refine upon upon my my uneasiness: uneasiness: for for steerforth steerforth was was at at oxford, oxford, as as he he wrote wrote to to me, me, and and when when i i was was not not at at the the commons, commons, i i was was very very much much alone. alone. i i believe believe i i had had at at this this time time some some lurking lurking distrust distrust of of steerforth. steerforth. i i wrote wrote to to him him most most affectionately affectionately in in reply reply to to his, his, but but i i think think i i was was glad, glad, upon upon the the whole, whole, that that he he could could not not come come to to london london just just then. then. i i suspect suspect the the truth truth to to be, be, that that the the influence influence of of agnes agnes was was upon upon me, me, undisturbed undisturbed by by the the sight sight of of him; him; and and that that it it was was the the more more powerful powerful with with me, me, because because she she had had so so large large a a share share in in my my thoughts thoughts and and interest. interest. in in the the meantime, meantime, days days and and weeks weeks slipped slipped away. away. i i was was articled articled to to spenlow spenlow and and jorkins. jorkins. i i had had ninety ninety pounds pounds a a year year (exclusive (exclusive of of my my house-rent house-rent and and sundry sundry collateral collateral matters) matters) from from my my aunt. aunt. my my rooms rooms were were engaged engaged for for twelve twelve months months certain: certain: and and though though i i still still found found them them dreary dreary of of an an evening, evening, and and the the evenings evenings long, long, i i could could settle settle down down into into a a state state of of equable equable low low spirits, spirits, and and resign resign myself myself to to coffee; coffee; which which i i seem, seem, on on looking looking back, back, to to have have taken taken by by the the gallon gallon at at about about this this period period of of my my existence. existence. at at about about this this time, time, too, too, i i made made three three discoveries: discoveries: first, first, that that mrs. mrs. crupp crupp was was a a martyr martyr to to a a curious curious disorder disorder called called 'the 'the spazzums', spazzums', which which was was generally generally accompanied accompanied with with inflammation inflammation of of the the nose, nose, and and required required to to be be constantly constantly treated treated with with peppermint; peppermint; secondly, secondly, that that something something peculiar peculiar in in the the temperature temperature of of my my pantry, pantry, made made the the brandy-bottles brandy-bottles burst; burst; thirdly, thirdly, that that i i was was alone alone in in the the world, world, and and much much given given to to record record that that circumstance circumstance in in fragments fragments of of english english versification. versification. on on the the day day when when i i was was articled, articled, no no festivity festivity took took place, place, beyond beyond my my having having sandwiches sandwiches and and sherry sherry into into the the office office for for the the clerks, clerks, and and going going alone alone to to the the theatre theatre at at night. night. i i went went to to see see the the stranger, stranger, as as a a doctors' doctors' commons commons sort sort of of play, play, and and was was so so dreadfully dreadfully cut cut up, up, that that i i hardly hardly knew knew myself myself in in my my own own glass glass when when i i got got home. home. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow remarked, remarked, on on this this occasion, occasion, when when we we concluded concluded our our business, business, that that he he should should have have been been happy happy to to have have seen seen me me at at his his house house at at norwood norwood to to celebrate celebrate our our becoming becoming connected, connected, but but for for his his domestic domestic arrangements arrangements being being in in some some disorder, disorder, on on account account of of the the expected expected return return of of his his daughter daughter from from finishing finishing her her education education at at paris. paris. but, but, he he intimated intimated that that when when she she came came home home he he should should hope hope to to have have the the pleasure pleasure of of entertaining entertaining me. me. i i knew knew that that he he was was a a widower widower with with one one daughter, daughter, and and expressed expressed my my acknowledgements. acknowledgements. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow was was as as good good as as his his word. word. in in a a week week or or two, two, he he referred referred to to this this engagement, engagement, and and said, said, that that if if i i would would do do him him the the favour favour to to come come down down next next saturday, saturday, and and stay stay till till monday, monday, he he would would be be extremely extremely happy. happy. of of course course i i said said i i would would do do him him the the favour; favour; and and he he was was to to drive drive me me down down in in his his phaeton, phaeton, and and to to bring bring me me back. back. when when the the day day arrived, arrived, my my very very carpet-bag carpet-bag was was an an object object of of veneration veneration to to the the stipendiary stipendiary clerks, clerks, to to whom whom the the house house at at norwood norwood was was a a sacred sacred mystery. mystery. one one of of them them informed informed me me that that he he had had heard heard that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow ate ate entirely entirely off off plate plate and and china; china; and and another another hinted hinted at at champagne champagne being being constantly constantly on on draught, draught, after after the the usual usual custom custom of of table-beer. table-beer. the the old old clerk clerk with with the the wig, wig, whose whose name name was was mr. mr. tiffey, tiffey, had had been been down down on on business business several several times times in in the the course course of of his his career, career, and and had had on on each each occasion occasion penetrated penetrated to to the the breakfast-parlour. breakfast-parlour. he he described described it it as as an an apartment apartment of of the the most most sumptuous sumptuous nature, nature, and and said said that that he he had had drunk drunk brown brown east east india india sherry sherry there, there, of of a a quality quality so so precious precious as as to to make make a a man man wink. wink. we we had had an an adjourned adjourned cause cause in in the the consistory consistory that that day day -- -- about about excommunicating excommunicating a a baker baker who who had had been been objecting objecting in in a a vestry vestry to to a a paving-rate paving-rate -- -- and and as as the the evidence evidence was was just just twice twice the the length length of of robinson robinson crusoe, crusoe, according according to to a a calculation calculation i i made, made, it it was was rather rather late late in in the the day day before before we we finished. finished. however, however, we we got got him him excommunicated excommunicated for for six six weeks, weeks, and and sentenced sentenced in in no no end end of of costs; costs; and and then then the the baker's baker's proctor, proctor, and and the the judge, judge, and and the the advocates advocates on on both both sides sides (who (who were were all all nearly nearly related), related), went went out out of of town town together, together, and and mr. mr. spenlow spenlow and and i i drove drove away away in in the the phaeton. phaeton. the the phaeton phaeton was was a a very very handsome handsome affair; affair; the the horses horses arched arched their their necks necks and and lifted lifted up up their their legs legs as as if if they they knew knew they they belonged belonged to to doctors' doctors' commons. commons. there there was was a a good good deal deal of of competition competition in in the the commons commons on on all all points points of of display, display, and and it it turned turned out out some some very very choice choice equipages equipages then; then; though though i i always always have have considered, considered, and and always always shall shall consider, consider, that that in in my my time time the the great great article article of of competition competition there there was was starch: starch: which which i i think think was was worn worn among among the the proctors proctors to to as as great great an an extent extent as as it it is is in in the the nature nature of of man man to to bear. bear. we we were were very very pleasant, pleasant, going going down, down, and and mr. mr. spenlow spenlow gave gave me me some some hints hints in in reference reference to to my my profession. profession. he he said said it it was was the the genteelest genteelest profession profession in in the the world, world, and and must must on on no no account account be be confounded confounded with with the the profession profession of of a a solicitor: solicitor: being being quite quite another another sort sort of of thing, thing, infinitely infinitely more more exclusive, exclusive, less less mechanical, mechanical, and and more more profitable. profitable. we we took took things things much much more more easily easily in in the the commons commons than than they they could could be be taken taken anywhere anywhere else, else, he he observed, observed, and and that that set set us, us, as as a a privileged privileged class, class, apart. apart. he he said said it it was was impossible impossible to to conceal conceal the the disagreeable disagreeable fact, fact, that that we we were were chiefly chiefly employed employed by by solicitors; solicitors; but but he he gave gave me me to to understand understand that that they they were were an an inferior inferior race race of of men, men, universally universally looked looked down down upon upon by by all all proctors proctors of of any any pretensions. pretensions. i i asked asked mr. mr. spenlow spenlow what what he he considered considered the the best best sort sort of of professional professional business? business? he he replied, replied, that that a a good good case case of of a a disputed disputed will, will, where where there there was was a a neat neat little little estate estate of of thirty thirty or or forty forty thousand thousand pounds, pounds, was, was, perhaps, perhaps, the the best best of of all. all. in in such such a a case, case, he he said, said, not not only only were were there there very very pretty pretty pickings, pickings, in in the the way way of of arguments arguments at at every every stage stage of of the the proceedings, proceedings, and and mountains mountains upon upon mountains mountains of of evidence evidence on on interrogatory interrogatory and and counter-interrogatory counter-interrogatory (to (to say say nothing nothing of of an an appeal appeal lying, lying, first first to to the the delegates, delegates, and and then then to to the the lords), lords), but, but, the the costs costs being being pretty pretty sure sure to to come come out out of of the the estate estate at at last, last, both both sides sides went went at at it it in in a a lively lively and and spirited spirited manner, manner, and and expense expense was was no no consideration. consideration. then, then, he he launched launched into into a a general general eulogium eulogium on on the the commons. commons. what what was was to to be be particularly particularly admired admired (he (he said) said) in in the the commons, commons, was was its its compactness. compactness. it it was was the the most most conveniently conveniently organized organized place place in in the the world. world. it it was was the the complete complete idea idea of of snugness. snugness. it it lay lay in in a a nutshell. nutshell. for for example: example: you brought brought a a divorce divorce case, case, or or a a restitution restitution case, case, into into the the consistory. consistory. very very good. good. you tried tried it it in in the the consistory. consistory. you made made a a quiet quiet little little round round game game of of it, it, among among a a family family group, group, and and you played played it it out out at at leisure. leisure. suppose suppose you were were not not satisfied satisfied with with the the consistory, consistory, what what did did you do do then? then? why, why, you went went into into the the arches. arches. what what was was the the arches? arches? the the same same court, court, in in the the same same room, room, with with the the same same bar, bar, and and the the same same practitioners, practitioners, but but another another judge, judge, for for there there the the consistory consistory judge judge could could plead plead any any court-day court-day as as an an advocate. advocate. well, well, you played played your your round round game game out out again. again. still still you were were not not satisfied. satisfied. very very good. good. what what did did you do do then? then? why, why, you went went to to the the delegates. delegates. who who were were the the delegates? delegates? why, why, the the ecclesiastical ecclesiastical delegates delegates were were the the advocates advocates without without any any business, business, who who had had looked looked on on at at the the round round game game when when it it was was playing playing in in both both courts, courts, and and had had seen seen the the cards cards shuffled, shuffled, and and cut, cut, and and played, played, and and had had talked talked to to all all the the players players about about it, it, and and now now came came fresh, fresh, as as judges, judges, to to settle settle the the matter matter to to the the satisfaction satisfaction of of everybody! everybody! discontented discontented people people might might talk talk of of corruption corruption in in the the commons, commons, closeness closeness in in the the commons, commons, and and the the necessity necessity of of reforming reforming the the commons, commons, said said mr. mr. spenlow spenlow solemnly, solemnly, in in conclusion; conclusion; but but when when the the price price of of wheat wheat per per bushel bushel had had been been highest, highest, the the commons commons had had been been busiest; busiest; and and a a man man might might lay lay his his hand hand upon upon his his heart, heart, and and say say this this to to the the whole whole world, world, -- -- 'touch 'touch the the commons, commons, and and down down comes comes the the country!' country!' i i listened listened to to all all this this with with attention; attention; and and though, though, i i must must say, say, i i had had my my doubts doubts whether whether the the country country was was quite quite as as much much obliged obliged to to the the commons commons as as mr. mr. spenlow spenlow made made out, out, i i respectfully respectfully deferred deferred to to his his opinion. opinion. that that about about the the price price of of wheat wheat per per bushel, bushel, i i modestly modestly felt felt was was too too much much for for my my strength, strength, and and quite quite settled settled the the question. question. i i have have never, never, to to this this hour, hour, got got the the better better of of that that bushel bushel of of wheat. wheat. it it has has reappeared reappeared to to annihilate annihilate me, me, all all through through my my life, life, in in connexion connexion with with all all kinds kinds of of subjects. subjects. i i don't don't know know now, now, exactly, exactly, what what it it has has to to do do with with me, me, or or what what right right it it has has to to crush crush me, me, on on an an infinite infinite variety variety of of occasions; occasions; but but whenever whenever i i see see my my old old friend friend the the bushel bushel brought brought in in by by the the head head and and shoulders shoulders (as (as he he always always is, is, i i observe), observe), i i give give up up a a subject subject for for lost. lost. this this is is a a digression. digression. i i was was not not the the man man to to touch touch the the commons, commons, and and bring bring down down the the country. country. i i submissively submissively expressed, expressed, by by my my silence, silence, my my acquiescence acquiescence in in all all i i had had heard heard from from my my superior superior in in years years and and knowledge; knowledge; and and we we talked talked about about the the stranger stranger and and the the drama, drama, and and the the pairs pairs of of horses, horses, until until we we came came to to mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's gate. gate. there there was was a a lovely lovely garden garden to to mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's house; house; and and though though that that was was not not the the best best time time of of the the year year for for seeing seeing a a garden, garden, it it was was so so beautifully beautifully kept, kept, that that i i was was quite quite enchanted. enchanted. there there was was a a charming charming lawn, lawn, there there were were clusters clusters of of trees, trees, and and there there were were perspective perspective walks walks that that i i could could just just distinguish distinguish in in the the dark, dark, arched arched over over with with trellis-work, trellis-work, on on which which shrubs shrubs and and flowers flowers grew grew in in the the growing growing season. season. 'here 'here miss miss spenlow spenlow walks walks by by herself,' herself,' i i thought. thought. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' we we went went into into the the house, house, which which was was cheerfully cheerfully lighted lighted up, up, and and into into a a hall hall where where there there were were all all sorts sorts of of hats, hats, caps, caps, great-coats, great-coats, plaids, plaids, gloves, gloves, whips, whips, and and walking-sticks. walking-sticks. 'where 'where is is miss miss dora?' dora?' said said mr. mr. spenlow spenlow to to the the servant. servant. 'dora!' 'dora!' i i thought. thought. 'what 'what a a beautiful beautiful name!' name!' we we turned turned into into a a room room near near at at hand hand (i (i think think it it was was the the identical identical breakfast-room, breakfast-room, made made memorable memorable by by the the brown brown east east indian indian sherry), sherry), and and i i heard heard a a voice voice say, say, 'mr. 'mr. copperfield, copperfield, my my daughter daughter dora, dora, and and my my daughter daughter dora's dora's confidential confidential friend!' friend!' it it was, was, no no doubt, doubt, mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's voice, voice, but but i i didn't didn't know know it, it, and and i i didn't didn't care care whose whose it it was. was. all all was was over over in in a a moment. moment. i i had had fulfilled fulfilled my my destiny. destiny. i i was was a a captive captive and and a a slave. slave. i i loved loved dora dora spenlow spenlow to to distraction! distraction! she she was was more more than than human human to to me. me. she she was was a a fairy, fairy, a a sylph, sylph, i i don't don't know know what what she she was was -- -- anything anything that that no no one one ever ever saw, saw, and and everything everything that that everybody everybody ever ever wanted. wanted. i i was was swallowed swallowed up up in in an an abyss abyss of of love love in in an an instant. instant. there there was was no no pausing pausing on on the the brink; brink; no no looking looking down, down, or or looking looking back; back; i i was was gone, gone, headlong, headlong, before before i i had had sense sense to to say say a a word word to to her. her. 'i,' 'i,' observed observed a a well-remembered well-remembered voice, voice, when when i i had had bowed bowed and and murmured murmured something, something, 'have 'have seen seen mr. mr. copperfield copperfield before.' before.' the the speaker speaker was was not not dora. dora. no; no; the the confidential confidential friend, friend, miss miss murdstone! murdstone! i i don't don't think think i i was was much much astonished. astonished. to to the the best best of of my my judgement, judgement, no no capacity capacity of of astonishment astonishment was was left left in in me. me. there there was was nothing nothing worth worth mentioning mentioning in in the the material material world, world, but but dora dora spenlow, spenlow, to to be be astonished astonished about. about. i i said, said, 'how 'how do do you do, do, miss miss murdstone? murdstone? i i hope hope you are are well.' well.' she she answered, answered, 'very 'very well.' well.' i i said, said, 'how 'how is is mr. mr. murdstone?' murdstone?' she she replied, replied, 'my 'my brother brother is is robust, robust, i i am am obliged obliged to to you.' mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, who, who, i i suppose, suppose, had had been been surprised surprised to to see see us us recognize recognize each each other, other, then then put put in in his his word. word. 'i 'i am am glad glad to to find,' find,' he he said, said, 'copperfield, 'copperfield, that that you and and miss miss murdstone murdstone are are already already acquainted.' acquainted.' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield copperfield and and myself,' myself,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, with with severe severe composure, composure, 'are 'are connexions. connexions. we we were were once once slightly slightly acquainted. acquainted. it it was was in in his his childish childish days. days. circumstances circumstances have have separated separated us us since. since. i i should should not not have have known known him.' him.' i i replied replied that that i i should should have have known known her, her, anywhere. anywhere. which which was was true true enough. enough. 'miss 'miss murdstone murdstone has has had had the the goodness,' goodness,' said said mr. mr. spenlow spenlow to to me, me, 'to 'to accept accept the the office office -- -- if if i i may may so so describe describe it it -- -- of of my my daughter daughter dora's dora's confidential confidential friend. friend. my my daughter daughter dora dora having, having, unhappily, unhappily, no no mother, mother, miss miss murdstone murdstone is is obliging obliging enough enough to to become become her her companion companion and and protector.' protector.' a a passing passing thought thought occurred occurred to to me me that that miss miss murdstone, murdstone, like like the the pocket pocket instrument instrument called called a a life-preserver, life-preserver, was was not not so so much much designed designed for for purposes purposes of of protection protection as as of of assault. assault. but but as as i i had had none none but but passing passing thoughts thoughts for for any any subject subject save save dora, dora, i i glanced glanced at at her, her, directly directly afterwards, afterwards, and and was was thinking thinking that that i i saw, saw, in in her her prettily prettily pettish pettish manner, manner, that that she she was was not not very very much much inclined inclined to to be be particularly particularly confidential confidential to to her her companion companion and and protector, protector, when when a a bell bell rang, rang, which which mr. mr. spenlow spenlow said said was was the the first first dinner-bell, dinner-bell, and and so so carried carried me me off off to to dress. dress. the the idea idea of of dressing dressing one's one's self, self, or or doing doing anything anything in in the the way way of of action, action, in in that that state state of of love, love, was was a a little little too too ridiculous. ridiculous. i i could could only only sit sit down down before before my my fire, fire, biting biting the the key key of of my my carpet-bag, carpet-bag, and and think think of of the the captivating, captivating, girlish, girlish, bright-eyed bright-eyed lovely lovely dora. dora. what what a a form form she she had, had, what what a a face face she she had, had, what what a a graceful, graceful, variable, variable, enchanting enchanting manner! manner! the the bell bell rang rang again again so so soon soon that that i i made made a a mere mere scramble scramble of of my my dressing, dressing, instead instead of of the the careful careful operation operation i i could could have have wished wished under under the the circumstances, circumstances, and and went went downstairs. downstairs. there there was was some some company. company. dora dora was was talking talking to to an an old old gentleman gentleman with with a a grey grey head. head. grey grey as as he he was was -- -- and and a a great-grandfather great-grandfather into into the the bargain, bargain, for for he he said said so so -- -- i i was was madly madly jealous jealous of of him. him. what what a a state state of of mind mind i i was was in! in! i i was was jealous jealous of of everybody. everybody. i i couldn't couldn't bear bear the the idea idea of of anybody anybody knowing knowing mr. mr. spenlow spenlow better better than than i i did. did. it it was was torturing torturing to to me me to to hear hear them them talk talk of of occurrences occurrences in in which which i i had had had had no no share. share. when when a a most most amiable amiable person, person, with with a a highly highly polished polished bald bald head, head, asked asked me me across across the the dinner dinner table, table, if if that that were were the the first first occasion occasion of of my my seeing seeing the the grounds, grounds, i i could could have have done done anything anything to to him him that that was was savage savage and and revengeful. revengeful. i i don't don't remember remember who who was was there, there, except except dora. dora. i i have have not not the the least least idea idea what what we we had had for for dinner, dinner, besides besides dora. dora. my my impression impression is, is, that that i i dined dined off off dora, dora, entirely, entirely, and and sent sent away away half-a-dozen half-a-dozen plates plates untouched. untouched. i i sat sat next next to to her. her. i i talked talked to to her. her. she she had had the the most most delightful delightful little little voice, voice, the the gayest gayest little little laugh, laugh, the the pleasantest pleasantest and and most most fascinating fascinating little little ways, ways, that that ever ever led led a a lost lost youth youth into into hopeless hopeless slavery. slavery. she she was was rather rather diminutive diminutive altogether. altogether. so so much much the the more more precious, precious, i i thought. thought. when when she she went went out out of of the the room room with with miss miss murdstone murdstone (no (no other other ladies ladies were were of of the the party), party), i i fell fell into into a a reverie, reverie, only only disturbed disturbed by by the the cruel cruel apprehension apprehension that that miss miss murdstone murdstone would would disparage disparage me me to to her. her. the the amiable amiable creature creature with with the the polished polished head head told told me me a a long long story, story, which which i i think think was was about about gardening. gardening. i i think think i i heard heard him him say, say, 'my 'my gardener', gardener', several several times. times. i i seemed seemed to to pay pay the the deepest deepest attention attention to to him, him, but but i i was was wandering wandering in in a a garden garden of of eden eden all all the the while, while, with with dora. dora. my my apprehensions apprehensions of of being being disparaged disparaged to to the the object object of of my my engrossing engrossing affection affection were were revived revived when when we we went went into into the the drawing-room, drawing-room, by by the the grim grim and and distant distant aspect aspect of of miss miss murdstone. murdstone. but but i i was was relieved relieved of of them them in in an an unexpected unexpected manner. manner. 'david 'david copperfield,' copperfield,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, beckoning beckoning me me aside aside into into a a window. window. 'a 'a word.' word.' i i confronted confronted miss miss murdstone murdstone alone. alone. 'david 'david copperfield,' copperfield,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'i 'i need need not not enlarge enlarge upon upon family family circumstances. circumstances. they they are are not not a a tempting tempting subject.' subject.' 'far 'far from from it, it, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i returned. returned. 'far 'far from from it,' it,' assented assented miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'i 'i do do not not wish wish to to revive revive the the memory memory of of past past differences, differences, or or of of past past outrages. outrages. i i have have received received outrages outrages from from a a person person -- -- a a female female i i am am sorry sorry to to say, say, for for the the credit credit of of my my sex sex -- -- who who is is not not to to be be mentioned mentioned without without scorn scorn and and disgust; disgust; and and therefore therefore i i would would rather rather not not mention mention her.' her.' i i felt felt very very fiery fiery on on my my aunt's aunt's account; account; but but i i said said it it would would certainly certainly be be better, better, if if miss miss murdstone murdstone pleased, pleased, not not to to mention mention her. her. i i could could not not hear hear her her disrespectfully disrespectfully mentioned, mentioned, i i added, added, without without expressing expressing my my opinion opinion in in a a decided decided tone. tone. miss miss murdstone murdstone shut shut her her eyes, eyes, and and disdainfully disdainfully inclined inclined her her head; head; then, then, slowly slowly opening opening her her eyes, eyes, resumed: resumed: 'david 'david copperfield, copperfield, i i shall shall not not attempt attempt to to disguise disguise the the fact, fact, that that i i formed formed an an unfavourable unfavourable opinion opinion of of you in in your your childhood. childhood. it it may may have have been been a a mistaken mistaken one, one, or or you may may have have ceased ceased to to justify justify it. it. that that is is not not in in question question between between us us now. now. i i belong belong to to a a family family remarkable, remarkable, i i believe, believe, for for some some firmness; firmness; and and i i am am not not the the creature creature of of circumstance circumstance or or change. change. i i may may have have my my opinion opinion of of you. you may may have have your your opinion opinion of of me.' me.' i i inclined inclined my my head, head, in in my my turn. turn. 'but 'but it it is is not not necessary,' necessary,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'that 'that these these opinions opinions should should come come into into collision collision here. here. under under existing existing circumstances, circumstances, it it is is as as well well on on all all accounts accounts that that they they should should not. not. as as the the chances chances of of life life have have brought brought us us together together again, again, and and may may bring bring us us together together on on other other occasions, occasions, i i would would say, say, let let us us meet meet here here as as distant distant acquaintances. acquaintances. family family circumstances circumstances are are a a sufficient sufficient reason reason for for our our only only meeting meeting on on that that footing, footing, and and it it is is quite quite unnecessary unnecessary that that either either of of us us should should make make the the other other the the subject subject of of remark. remark. do do you approve approve of of this?' this?' 'miss 'miss murdstone,' murdstone,' i i returned, returned, 'i 'i think think you and and mr. mr. murdstone murdstone used used me me very very cruelly, cruelly, and and treated treated my my mother mother with with great great unkindness. unkindness. i i shall shall always always think think so, so, as as long long as as i i live. live. but but i i quite quite agree agree in in what what you propose.' propose.' miss miss murdstone murdstone shut shut her her eyes eyes again, again, and and bent bent her her head. head. then, then, just just touching touching the the back back of of my my hand hand with with the the tips tips of of her her cold, cold, stiff stiff fingers, fingers, she she walked walked away, away, arranging arranging the the little little fetters fetters on on her her wrists wrists and and round round her her neck; neck; which which seemed seemed to to be be the the same same set, set, in in exactly exactly the the same same state, state, as as when when i i had had seen seen her her last. last. these these reminded reminded me, me, in in reference reference to to miss miss murdstone's murdstone's nature, nature, of of the the fetters fetters over over a a jail jail door; door; suggesting suggesting on on the the outside, outside, to to all all beholders, beholders, what what was was to to be be expected expected within. within. all all i i know know of of the the rest rest of of the the evening evening is, is, that that i i heard heard the the empress empress of of my my heart heart sing sing enchanted enchanted ballads ballads in in the the french french language, language, generally generally to to the the effect effect that, that, whatever whatever was was the the matter, matter, we we ought ought always always to to dance, dance, ta ta ra ra la, la, ta ta ra ra la! la! accompanying accompanying herself herself on on a a glorified glorified instrument, instrument, resembling resembling a a guitar. guitar. that that i i was was lost lost in in blissful blissful delirium. delirium. that that i i refused refused refreshment. refreshment. that that my my soul soul recoiled recoiled from from punch punch particularly. particularly. that that when when miss miss murdstone murdstone took took her her into into custody custody and and led led her her away, away, she she smiled smiled and and gave gave me me her her delicious delicious hand. hand. that that i i caught caught a a view view of of myself myself in in a a mirror, mirror, looking looking perfectly perfectly imbecile imbecile and and idiotic. idiotic. that that i i retired retired to to bed bed in in a a most most maudlin maudlin state state of of mind, mind, and and got got up up in in a a crisis crisis of of feeble feeble infatuation. infatuation. it it was was a a fine fine morning, morning, and and early, early, and and i i thought thought i i would would go go and and take take a a stroll stroll down down one one of of those those wire-arched wire-arched walks, walks, and and indulge indulge my my passion passion by by dwelling dwelling on on her her image. image. on on my my way way through through the the hall, hall, i i encountered encountered her her little little dog, dog, who who was was called called jip jip -- -- short short for for gipsy. gipsy. i i approached approached him him tenderly, tenderly, for for i i loved loved even even him; him; but but he he showed showed his his whole whole set set of of teeth, teeth, got got under under a a chair chair expressly expressly to to snarl, snarl, and and wouldn't wouldn't hear hear of of the the least least familiarity. familiarity. the the garden garden was was cool cool and and solitary. solitary. i i walked walked about, about, wondering wondering what what my my feelings feelings of of happiness happiness would would be, be, if if i i could could ever ever become become engaged engaged to to this this dear dear wonder. wonder. as as to to marriage, marriage, and and fortune, fortune, and and all all that, that, i i believe believe i i was was almost almost as as innocently innocently undesigning undesigning then, then, as as when when i i loved loved little little em'ly. em'ly. to to be be allowed allowed to to call call her her 'dora', 'dora', to to write write to to her, her, to to dote dote upon upon and and worship worship her, her, to to have have reason reason to to think think that that when when she she was was with with other other people people she she was was yet yet mindful mindful of of me, me, seemed seemed to to me me the the summit summit of of human human ambition ambition -- -- i i am am sure sure it it was was the the summit summit of of mine. mine. there there is is no no doubt doubt whatever whatever that that i i was was a a lackadaisical lackadaisical young young spooney; spooney; but but there there was was a a purity purity of of heart heart in in all all this, this, that that prevents prevents my my having having quite quite a a contemptuous contemptuous recollection recollection of of it, it, let let me me laugh laugh as as i i may. may. i i had had not not been been walking walking long, long, when when i i turned turned a a corner, corner, and and met met her. her. i i tingle tingle again again from from head head to to foot foot as as my my recollection recollection turns turns that that corner, corner, and and my my pen pen shakes shakes in in my my hand. hand. 'you -- -- are are -- -- out out early, early, miss miss spenlow,' spenlow,' said said i. i. 'it's 'it's so so stupid stupid at at home,' home,' she she replied, replied, 'and 'and miss miss murdstone murdstone is is so so absurd! absurd! she she talks talks such such nonsense nonsense about about its its being being necessary necessary for for the the day day to to be be aired, aired, before before i i come come out. out. aired!' aired!' (she (she laughed, laughed, here, here, in in the the most most melodious melodious manner.) manner.) 'on 'on a a sunday sunday morning, morning, when when i i don't don't practise, practise, i i must must do do something. something. so so i i told told papa papa last last night night i i must must come come out. out. besides, besides, it's it's the the brightest brightest time time of of the the whole whole day. day. don't don't you think think so?' so?' i i hazarded hazarded a a bold bold flight, flight, and and said said (not (not without without stammering) stammering) that that it it was was very very bright bright to to me me then, then, though though it it had had been been very very dark dark to to me me a a minute minute before. before. 'do 'do you mean mean a a compliment?' compliment?' said said dora, dora, 'or 'or that that the the weather weather has has really really changed?' changed?' i i stammered stammered worse worse than than before, before, in in replying replying that that i i meant meant no no compliment, compliment, but but the the plain plain truth; truth; though though i i was was not not aware aware of of any any change change having having taken taken place place in in the the weather. weather. it it was was in in the the state state of of my my own own feelings, feelings, i i added added bashfully: bashfully: to to clench clench the the explanation. explanation. i i never never saw saw such such curls curls -- -- how how could could i, i, for for there there never never were were such such curls! curls! -- -- as as those those she she shook shook out out to to hide hide her her blushes. blushes. as as to to the the straw straw hat hat and and blue blue ribbons ribbons which which was was on on the the top top of of the the curls, curls, if if i i could could only only have have hung hung it it up up in in my my room room in in buckingham buckingham street, street, what what a a priceless priceless possession possession it it would would have have been! been! 'you have have just just come come home home from from paris,' paris,' said said i. i. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said she. she. 'have 'have you ever ever been been there?' there?' 'no.' 'no.' 'oh! 'oh! i i hope hope you'll you'll go go soon! soon! you would would like like it it so so much!' much!' traces traces of of deep-seated deep-seated anguish anguish appeared appeared in in my my countenance. countenance. that that she she should should hope hope i i would would go, go, that that she she should should think think it it possible possible i i could could go, go, was was insupportable. insupportable. i i depreciated depreciated paris; paris; i i depreciated depreciated france. france. i i said said i i wouldn't wouldn't leave leave england, england, under under existing existing circumstances, circumstances, for for any any earthly earthly consideration. consideration. nothing nothing should should induce induce me. me. in in short, short, she she was was shaking shaking the the curls curls again, again, when when the the little little dog dog came came running running along along the the walk walk to to our our relief. relief. he he was was mortally mortally jealous jealous of of me, me, and and persisted persisted in in barking barking at at me. me. she she took took him him up up in in her her arms arms -- -- oh oh my my goodness! goodness! -- -- and and caressed caressed him, him, but but he he persisted persisted upon upon barking barking still. still. he he wouldn't wouldn't let let me me touch touch him, him, when when i i tried; tried; and and then then she she beat beat him. him. it it increased increased my my sufferings sufferings greatly greatly to to see see the the pats pats she she gave gave him him for for punishment punishment on on the the bridge bridge of of his his blunt blunt nose, nose, while while he he winked winked his his eyes, eyes, and and licked licked her her hand, hand, and and still still growled growled within within himself himself like like a a little little double-bass. double-bass. at at length length he he was was quiet quiet -- -- well well he he might might be be with with her her dimpled dimpled chin chin upon upon his his head! head! -- -- and and we we walked walked away away to to look look at at a a greenhouse. greenhouse. 'you are are not not very very intimate intimate with with miss miss murdstone, murdstone, are are you?' said said dora. dora. -- -- 'my 'my pet.' pet.' (the (the two two last last words words were were to to the the dog. dog. oh, oh, if if they they had had only only been been to to me!) me!) 'no,' 'no,' i i replied. replied. 'not 'not at at all all so.' so.' 'she 'she is is a a tiresome tiresome creature,' creature,' said said dora, dora, pouting. pouting. 'i 'i can't can't think think what what papa papa can can have have been been about, about, when when he he chose chose such such a a vexatious vexatious thing thing to to be be my my companion. companion. who who wants wants a a protector? protector? i i am am sure sure i i don't don't want want a a protector. protector. jip jip can can protect protect me me a a great great deal deal better better than than miss miss murdstone, murdstone, -- -- can't can't you, jip, jip, dear?' dear?' he he only only winked winked lazily, lazily, when when she she kissed kissed his his ball ball of of a a head. head. 'papa 'papa calls calls her her my my confidential confidential friend, friend, but but i i am am sure sure she she is is no no such such thing thing -- -- is is she, she, jip? jip? we we are are not not going going to to confide confide in in any any such such cross cross people, people, jip jip and and i. i. we we mean mean to to bestow bestow our our confidence confidence where where we we like, like, and and to to find find out out our our own own friends, friends, instead instead of of having having them them found found out out for for us us -- -- don't don't we, we, jip?' jip?' jip jip made made a a comfortable comfortable noise, noise, in in answer, answer, a a little little like like a a tea-kettle tea-kettle when when it it sings. sings. as as for for me, me, every every word word was was a a new new heap heap of of fetters, fetters, riveted riveted above above the the last. last. 'it 'it is is very very hard, hard, because because we we have have not not a a kind kind mama, mama, that that we we are are to to have, have, instead, instead, a a sulky, sulky, gloomy gloomy old old thing thing like like miss miss murdstone, murdstone, always always following following us us about about -- -- isn't isn't it, it, jip? jip? never never mind, mind, jip. jip. we we won't won't be be confidential, confidential, and and we'll we'll make make ourselves ourselves as as happy happy as as we we can can in in spite spite of of her, her, and and we'll we'll tease tease her, her, and and not not please please her her -- -- won't won't we, we, jip?' jip?' if if it it had had lasted lasted any any longer, longer, i i think think i i must must have have gone gone down down on on my my knees knees on on the the gravel, gravel, with with the the probability probability before before me me of of grazing grazing them, them, and and of of being being presently presently ejected ejected from from the the premises premises besides. besides. but, but, by by good good fortune fortune the the greenhouse greenhouse was was not not far far off, off, and and these these words words brought brought us us to to it. it. it it contained contained quite quite a a show show of of beautiful beautiful geraniums. geraniums. we we loitered loitered along along in in front front of of them, them, and and dora dora often often stopped stopped to to admire admire this this one one or or that that one, one, and and i i stopped stopped to to admire admire the the same same one, one, and and dora, dora, laughing, laughing, held held the the dog dog up up childishly, childishly, to to smell smell the the flowers; flowers; and and if if we we were were not not all all three three in in fairyland, fairyland, certainly certainly i i was. was. the the scent scent of of a a geranium geranium leaf, leaf, at at this this day, day, strikes strikes me me with with a a half half comical comical half half serious serious wonder wonder as as to to what what change change has has come come over over me me in in a a moment; moment; and and then then i i see see a a straw straw hat hat and and blue blue ribbons, ribbons, and and a a quantity quantity of of curls, curls, and and a a little little black black dog dog being being held held up, up, in in two two slender slender arms, arms, against against a a bank bank of of blossoms blossoms and and bright bright leaves. leaves. miss miss murdstone murdstone had had been been looking looking for for us. us. she she found found us us here; here; and and presented presented her her uncongenial uncongenial cheek, cheek, the the little little wrinkles wrinkles in in it it filled filled with with hair hair powder, powder, to to dora dora to to be be kissed. kissed. then then she she took took dora's dora's arm arm in in hers, hers, and and marched marched us us into into breakfast breakfast as as if if it it were were a a soldier's soldier's funeral. funeral. how how many many cups cups of of tea tea i i drank, drank, because because dora dora made made it, it, i i don't don't know. know. but, but, i i perfectly perfectly remember remember that that i i sat sat swilling swilling tea tea until until my my whole whole nervous nervous system, system, if if i i had had had had any any in in those those days, days, must must have have gone gone by by the the board. board. by by and and by by we we went went to to church. church. miss miss murdstone murdstone was was between between dora dora and and me me in in the the pew; pew; but but i i heard heard her her sing, sing, and and the the congregation congregation vanished. vanished. a a sermon sermon was was delivered delivered -- -- about about dora, dora, of of course course -- -- and and i i am am afraid afraid that that is is all all i i know know of of the the service. service. we we had had a a quiet quiet day. day. no no company, company, a a walk, walk, a a family family dinner dinner of of four, four, and and an an evening evening of of looking looking over over books books and and pictures; pictures; miss miss murdstone murdstone with with a a homily homily before before her, her, and and her her eye eye upon upon us, us, keeping keeping guard guard vigilantly. vigilantly. ah! ah! little little did did mr. mr. spenlow spenlow imagine, imagine, when when he he sat sat opposite opposite to to me me after after dinner dinner that that day, day, with with his his pocket-handkerchief pocket-handkerchief over over his his head, head, how how fervently fervently i i was was embracing embracing him, him, in in my my fancy, fancy, as as his his son-in-law! son-in-law! little little did did he he think, think, when when i i took took leave leave of of him him at at night, night, that that he he had had just just given given his his full full consent consent to to my my being being engaged engaged to to dora, dora, and and that that i i was was invoking invoking blessings blessings on on his his head! head! we we departed departed early early in in the the morning, morning, for for we we had had a a salvage salvage case case coming coming on on in in the the admiralty admiralty court, court, requiring requiring a a rather rather accurate accurate knowledge knowledge of of the the whole whole science science of of navigation, navigation, in in which which (as (as we we couldn't couldn't be be expected expected to to know know much much about about those those matters matters in in the the commons) commons) the the judge judge had had entreated entreated two two old old trinity trinity masters, masters, for for charity's charity's sake, sake, to to come come and and help help him him out. out. dora dora was was at at the the breakfast-table breakfast-table to to make make the the tea tea again, again, however; however; and and i i had had the the melancholy melancholy pleasure pleasure of of taking taking off off my my hat hat to to her her in in the the phaeton, phaeton, as as she she stood stood on on the the door-step door-step with with jip jip in in her her arms. arms. what what the the admiralty admiralty was was to to me me that that day; day; what what nonsense nonsense i i made made of of our our case case in in my my mind, mind, as as i i listened listened to to it; it; how how i i saw saw 'dora' 'dora' engraved engraved upon upon the the blade blade of of the the silver silver oar oar which which they they lay lay upon upon the the table, table, as as the the emblem emblem of of that that high high jurisdiction; jurisdiction; and and how how i i felt felt when when mr. mr. spenlow spenlow went went home home without without me me (i (i had had had had an an insane insane hope hope that that he he might might take take me me back back again), again), as as if if i i were were a a mariner mariner myself, myself, and and the the ship ship to to which which i i belonged belonged had had sailed sailed away away and and left left me me on on a a desert desert island; island; i i shall shall make make no no fruitless fruitless effort effort to to describe. describe. if if that that sleepy sleepy old old court court could could rouse rouse itself, itself, and and present present in in any any visible visible form form the the daydreams daydreams i i have have had had in in it it about about dora, dora, it it would would reveal reveal my my truth. truth. i i don't don't mean mean the the dreams dreams that that i i dreamed dreamed on on that that day day alone, alone, but but day day after after day, day, from from week week to to week, week, and and term term to to term. term. i i went went there, there, not not to to attend attend to to what what was was going going on, on, but but to to think think about about dora. dora. if if ever ever i i bestowed bestowed a a thought thought upon upon the the cases, cases, as as they they dragged dragged their their slow slow length length before before me, me, it it was was only only to to wonder, wonder, in in the the matrimonial matrimonial cases cases (remembering (remembering dora), dora), how how it it was was that that married married people people could could ever ever be be otherwise otherwise than than happy; happy; and, and, in in the the prerogative prerogative cases, cases, to to consider, consider, if if the the money money in in question question had had been been left left to to me, me, what what were were the the foremost foremost steps steps i i should should immediately immediately have have taken taken in in regard regard to to dora. dora. within within the the first first week week of of my my passion, passion, i i bought bought four four sumptuous sumptuous waistcoats waistcoats -- -- not not for for myself; myself; i i had had no no pride pride in in them; them; for for dora dora -- -- and and took took to to wearing wearing straw-coloured straw-coloured kid kid gloves gloves in in the the streets, streets, and and laid laid the the foundations foundations of of all all the the corns corns i i have have ever ever had. had. if if the the boots boots i i wore wore at at that that period period could could only only be be produced produced and and compared compared with with the the natural natural size size of of my my feet, feet, they they would would show show what what the the state state of of my my heart heart was, was, in in a a most most affecting affecting manner. manner. and and yet, yet, wretched wretched cripple cripple as as i i made made myself myself by by this this act act of of homage homage to to dora, dora, i i walked walked miles miles upon upon miles miles daily daily in in the the hope hope of of seeing seeing her. her. not not only only was was i i soon soon as as well well known known on on the the norwood norwood road road as as the the postmen postmen on on that that beat, beat, but but i i pervaded pervaded london london likewise. likewise. i i walked walked about about the the streets streets where where the the best best shops shops for for ladies ladies were, were, i i haunted haunted the the bazaar bazaar like like an an unquiet unquiet spirit, spirit, i i fagged fagged through through the the park park again again and and again, again, long long after after i i was was quite quite knocked knocked up. up. sometimes, sometimes, at at long long intervals intervals and and on on rare rare occasions, occasions, i i saw saw her. her. perhaps perhaps i i saw saw her her glove glove waved waved in in a a carriage carriage window; window; perhaps perhaps i i met met her, her, walked walked with with her her and and miss miss murdstone murdstone a a little little way, way, and and spoke spoke to to her. her. in in the the latter latter case case i i was was always always very very miserable miserable afterwards, afterwards, to to think think that that i i had had said said nothing nothing to to the the purpose; purpose; or or that that she she had had no no idea idea of of the the extent extent of of my my devotion, devotion, or or that that she she cared cared nothing nothing about about me. me. i i was was always always looking looking out, out, as as may may be be supposed, supposed, for for another another invitation invitation to to mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's house. house. i i was was always always being being disappointed, disappointed, for for i i got got none. none. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp must must have have been been a a woman woman of of penetration; penetration; for for when when this this attachment attachment was was but but a a few few weeks weeks old, old, and and i i had had not not had had the the courage courage to to write write more more explicitly explicitly even even to to agnes, agnes, than than that that i i had had been been to to mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's house, house, 'whose 'whose family,' family,' i i added, added, 'consists 'consists of of one one daughter'; daughter'; -- -- i i say say mrs. mrs. crupp crupp must must have have been been a a woman woman of of penetration, penetration, for, for, even even in in that that early early stage, stage, she she found found it it out. out. she she came came up up to to me me one one evening, evening, when when i i was was very very low, low, to to ask ask (she (she being being then then afflicted afflicted with with the the disorder disorder i i have have mentioned) mentioned) if if i i could could oblige oblige her her with with a a little little tincture tincture of of cardamums cardamums mixed mixed with with rhubarb, rhubarb, and and flavoured flavoured with with seven seven drops drops of of the the essence essence of of cloves, cloves, which which was was the the best best remedy remedy for for her her complaint; complaint; -- -- or, or, if if i i had had not not such such a a thing thing by by me, me, with with a a little little brandy, brandy, which which was was the the next next best. best. it it was was not, not, she she remarked, remarked, so so palatable palatable to to her, her, but but it it was was the the next next best. best. as as i i had had never never even even heard heard of of the the first first remedy, remedy, and and always always had had the the second second in in the the closet, closet, i i gave gave mrs. mrs. crupp crupp a a glass glass of of the the second, second, which which (that (that i i might might have have no no suspicion suspicion of of its its being being devoted devoted to to any any improper improper use) use) she she began began to to take take in in my my presence. presence. 'cheer 'cheer up, up, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'i 'i can't can't abear abear to to see see you so, so, sir: sir: i'm i'm a a mother mother myself.' myself.' i i did did not not quite quite perceive perceive the the application application of of this this fact fact to to myself, myself, but but i i smiled smiled on on mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, as as benignly benignly as as was was in in my my power. power. 'come, 'come, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'excuse 'excuse me. me. i i know know what what it it is, is, sir. sir. there's there's a a lady lady in in the the case.' case.' 'mrs. 'mrs. crupp?' crupp?' i i returned, returned, reddening. reddening. 'oh, 'oh, bless bless you! keep keep a a good good heart, heart, sir!' sir!' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, nodding nodding encouragement. encouragement. 'never 'never say say die, die, sir! sir! if if she she don't don't smile smile upon upon you, there's there's a a many many as as will. will. you are are a a young young gentleman gentleman to to be be smiled smiled on, on, mr. mr. copperfull, copperfull, and and you must must learn learn your your walue, walue, sir.' sir.' mrs. mrs. crupp crupp always always called called me me mr. mr. copperfull: copperfull: firstly, firstly, no no doubt, doubt, because because it it was was not not my my name; name; and and secondly, secondly, i i am am inclined inclined to to think, think, in in some some indistinct indistinct association association with with a a washing-day. washing-day. 'what 'what makes makes you suppose suppose there there is is any any young young lady lady in in the the case, case, mrs. mrs. crupp?' crupp?' said said i. i. 'mr. 'mr. copperfull,' copperfull,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, with with a a great great deal deal of of feeling, feeling, 'i'm 'i'm a a mother mother myself.' myself.' for for some some time time mrs. mrs. crupp crupp could could only only lay lay her her hand hand upon upon her her nankeen nankeen bosom, bosom, and and fortify fortify herself herself against against returning returning pain pain with with sips sips of of her her medicine. medicine. at at length length she she spoke spoke again. again. 'when 'when the the present present set set were were took took for for you by by your your dear dear aunt, aunt, mr. mr. copperfull,' copperfull,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, 'my 'my remark remark were, were, i i had had now now found found summun summun i i could could care care for. for. "thank "thank ev'in!" ev'in!" were were the the expression, expression, "i "i have have now now found found summun summun i i can can care care for!" for!" -- -- you don't don't eat eat enough, enough, sir, sir, nor nor yet yet drink.' drink.' 'is 'is that that what what you found found your your supposition supposition on, on, mrs. mrs. crupp?' crupp?' said said i. i. 'sir,' 'sir,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, in in a a tone tone approaching approaching to to severity, severity, 'i've 'i've laundressed laundressed other other young young gentlemen gentlemen besides besides yourself. yourself. a a young young gentleman gentleman may may be be over-careful over-careful of of himself, himself, or or he he may may be be under-careful under-careful of of himself. himself. he he may may brush brush his his hair hair too too regular, regular, or or too too un-regular. un-regular. he he may may wear wear his his boots boots much much too too large large for for him, him, or or much much too too small. small. that that is is according according as as the the young young gentleman gentleman has has his his original original character character formed. formed. but but let let him him go go to to which which extreme extreme he he may, may, sir, sir, there's there's a a young young lady lady in in both both of of 'em.' 'em.' mrs. mrs. crupp crupp shook shook her her head head in in such such a a determined determined manner, manner, that that i i had had not not an an inch inch of of vantage-ground vantage-ground left. left. 'it 'it was was but but the the gentleman gentleman which which died died here here before before yourself,' yourself,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, 'that 'that fell fell in in love love -- -- with with a a barmaid barmaid -- -- and and had had his his waistcoats waistcoats took took in in directly, directly, though though much much swelled swelled by by drinking.' drinking.' 'mrs. 'mrs. crupp,' crupp,' said said i, i, 'i 'i must must beg beg you not not to to connect connect the the young young lady lady in in my my case case with with a a barmaid, barmaid, or or anything anything of of that that sort, sort, if if you please.' please.' 'mr. 'mr. copperfull,' copperfull,' returned returned mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, 'i'm 'i'm a a mother mother myself, myself, and and not not likely. likely. i i ask ask your your pardon, pardon, sir, sir, if if i i intrude. intrude. i i should should never never wish wish to to intrude intrude where where i i were were not not welcome. welcome. but but you are are a a young young gentleman, gentleman, mr. mr. copperfull, copperfull, and and my my adwice adwice to to you is, is, to to cheer cheer up, up, sir, sir, to to keep keep a a good good heart, heart, and and to to know know your your own own walue. walue. if if you was was to to take take to to something, something, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, 'if 'if you was was to to take take to to skittles, skittles, now, now, which which is is healthy, healthy, you might might find find it it divert divert your your mind, mind, and and do do you good.' good.' with with these these words, words, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, affecting affecting to to be be very very careful careful of of the the brandy brandy -- -- which which was was all all gone gone -- -- thanked thanked me me with with a a majestic majestic curtsey, curtsey, and and retired. retired. as as her her figure figure disappeared disappeared into into the the gloom gloom of of the the entry, entry, this this counsel counsel certainly certainly presented presented itself itself to to my my mind mind in in the the light light of of a a slight slight liberty liberty on on mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's part; part; but, but, at at the the same same time, time, i i was was content content to to receive receive it, it, in in another another point point of of view, view, as as a a word word to to the the wise, wise, and and a a warning warning in in future future to to keep keep my my secret secret better. better. chapter chapter 27. 27. tommy tommy traddles traddles it it may may have have been been in in consequence consequence of of mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's advice, advice, and, and, perhaps, perhaps, for for no no better better reason reason than than because because there there was was a a certain certain similarity similarity in in the the sound sound of of the the word word skittles skittles and and traddles, traddles, that that it it came came into into my my head, head, next next day, day, to to go go and and look look after after traddles. traddles. the the time time he he had had mentioned mentioned was was more more than than out, out, and and he he lived lived in in a a little little street street near near the the veterinary veterinary college college at at camden camden town, town, which which was was principally principally tenanted, tenanted, as as one one of of our our clerks clerks who who lived lived in in that that direction direction informed informed me, me, by by gentlemen gentlemen students, students, who who bought bought live live donkeys, donkeys, and and made made experiments experiments on on those those quadrupeds quadrupeds in in their their private private apartments. apartments. having having obtained obtained from from this this clerk clerk a a direction direction to to the the academic academic grove grove in in question, question, i i set set out, out, the the same same afternoon, afternoon, to to visit visit my my old old schoolfellow. schoolfellow. i i found found that that the the street street was was not not as as desirable desirable a a one one as as i i could could have have wished wished it it to to be, be, for for the the sake sake of of traddles. traddles. the the inhabitants inhabitants appeared appeared to to have have a a propensity propensity to to throw throw any any little little trifles trifles they they were were not not in in want want of, of, into into the the road: road: which which not not only only made made it it rank rank and and sloppy, sloppy, but but untidy untidy too, too, on on account account of of the the cabbage-leaves. cabbage-leaves. the the refuse refuse was was not not wholly wholly vegetable vegetable either, either, for for i i myself myself saw saw a a shoe, shoe, a a doubled-up doubled-up saucepan, saucepan, a a black black bonnet, bonnet, and and an an umbrella, umbrella, in in various various stages stages of of decomposition, decomposition, as as i i was was looking looking out out for for the the number number i i wanted. wanted. the the general general air air of of the the place place reminded reminded me me forcibly forcibly of of the the days days when when i i lived lived with with mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. an an indescribable indescribable character character of of faded faded gentility gentility that that attached attached to to the the house house i i sought, sought, and and made made it it unlike unlike all all the the other other houses houses in in the the street street -- -- though though they they were were all all built built on on one one monotonous monotonous pattern, pattern, and and looked looked like like the the early early copies copies of of a a blundering blundering boy boy who who was was learning learning to to make make houses, houses, and and had had not not yet yet got got out out of of his his cramped cramped brick-and-mortar brick-and-mortar pothooks pothooks -- -- reminded reminded me me still still more more of of mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. happening happening to to arrive arrive at at the the door door as as it it was was opened opened to to the the afternoon afternoon milkman, milkman, i i was was reminded reminded of of mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber more more forcibly forcibly yet. yet. 'now,' 'now,' said said the the milkman milkman to to a a very very youthful youthful servant servant girl. girl. 'has 'has that that there there little little bill bill of of mine mine been been heerd heerd on?' on?' 'oh, 'oh, master master says says he'll he'll attend attend to to it it immediate,' immediate,' was was the the reply. reply. 'because,' 'because,' said said the the milkman, milkman, going going on on as as if if he he had had received received no no answer, answer, and and speaking, speaking, as as i i judged judged from from his his tone, tone, rather rather for for the the edification edification of of somebody somebody within within the the house, house, than than of of the the youthful youthful servant servant -- -- an an impression impression which which was was strengthened strengthened by by his his manner manner of of glaring glaring down down the the passage passage -- -- 'because 'because that that there there little little bill bill has has been been running running so so long, long, that that i i begin begin to to believe believe it's it's run run away away altogether, altogether, and and never never won't won't be be heerd heerd of. of. now, now, i'm i'm not not a a going going to to stand stand it, it, you know!' know!' said said the the milkman, milkman, still still throwing throwing his his voice voice into into the the house, house, and and glaring glaring down down the the passage. passage. as as to to his his dealing dealing in in the the mild mild article article of of milk, milk, by by the the by, by, there there never never was was a a greater greater anomaly. anomaly. his his deportment deportment would would have have been been fierce fierce in in a a butcher butcher or or a a brandy-merchant. brandy-merchant. the the voice voice of of the the youthful youthful servant servant became became faint, faint, but but she she seemed seemed to to me, me, from from the the action action of of her her lips, lips, again again to to murmur murmur that that it it would would be be attended attended to to immediate. immediate. 'i 'i tell tell you what,' what,' said said the the milkman, milkman, looking looking hard hard at at her her for for the the first first time, time, and and taking taking her her by by the the chin, chin, 'are 'are you fond fond of of milk?' milk?' 'yes, 'yes, i i likes likes it,' it,' she she replied. replied. 'good,' 'good,' said said the the milkman. milkman. 'then 'then you won't won't have have none none tomorrow. tomorrow. d'ye d'ye hear? hear? not not a a fragment fragment of of milk milk you won't won't have have tomorrow.' tomorrow.' i i thought thought she she seemed, seemed, upon upon the the whole, whole, relieved relieved by by the the prospect prospect of of having having any any today. today. the the milkman, milkman, after after shaking shaking his his head head at at her her darkly, darkly, released released her her chin, chin, and and with with anything anything rather rather than than good-will good-will opened opened his his can, can, and and deposited deposited the the usual usual quantity quantity in in the the family family jug. jug. this this done, done, he he went went away, away, muttering, muttering, and and uttered uttered the the cry cry of of his his trade trade next next door, door, in in a a vindictive vindictive shriek. shriek. 'does 'does mr. mr. traddles traddles live live here?' here?' i i then then inquired. inquired. a a mysterious mysterious voice voice from from the the end end of of the the passage passage replied replied 'yes.' 'yes.' upon upon which which the the youthful youthful servant servant replied replied 'yes.' 'yes.' 'is 'is he he at at home?' home?' said said i. i. again again the the mysterious mysterious voice voice replied replied in in the the affirmative, affirmative, and and again again the the servant servant echoed echoed it. it. upon upon this, this, i i walked walked in, in, and and in in pursuance pursuance of of the the servant's servant's directions directions walked walked upstairs; upstairs; conscious, conscious, as as i i passed passed the the back back parlour-door, parlour-door, that that i i was was surveyed surveyed by by a a mysterious mysterious eye, eye, probably probably belonging belonging to to the the mysterious mysterious voice. voice. when when i i got got to to the the top top of of the the stairs stairs -- -- the the house house was was only only a a story story high high above above the the ground ground floor floor -- -- traddles traddles was was on on the the landing landing to to meet meet me. me. he he was was delighted delighted to to see see me, me, and and gave gave me me welcome, welcome, with with great great heartiness, heartiness, to to his his little little room. room. it it was was in in the the front front of of the the house, house, and and extremely extremely neat, neat, though though sparely sparely furnished. furnished. it it was was his his only only room, room, i i saw; saw; for for there there was was a a sofa-bedstead sofa-bedstead in in it, it, and and his his blacking-brushes blacking-brushes and and blacking blacking were were among among his his books books -- -- on on the the top top shelf, shelf, behind behind a a dictionary. dictionary. his his table table was was covered covered with with papers, papers, and and he he was was hard hard at at work work in in an an old old coat. coat. i i looked looked at at nothing, nothing, that that i i know know of, of, but but i i saw saw everything, everything, even even to to the the prospect prospect of of a a church church upon upon his his china china inkstand, inkstand, as as i i sat sat down down -- -- and and this, this, too, too, was was a a faculty faculty confirmed confirmed in in me me in in the the old old micawber micawber times. times. various various ingenious ingenious arrangements arrangements he he had had made, made, for for the the disguise disguise of of his his chest chest of of drawers, drawers, and and the the accommodation accommodation of of his his boots, boots, his his shaving-glass, shaving-glass, and and so so forth, forth, particularly particularly impressed impressed themselves themselves upon upon me, me, as as evidences evidences of of the the same same traddles traddles who who used used to to make make models models of of elephants' elephants' dens dens in in writing-paper writing-paper to to put put flies flies in; in; and and to to comfort comfort himself himself under under ill ill usage, usage, with with the the memorable memorable works works of of art art i i have have so so often often mentioned. mentioned. in in a a corner corner of of the the room room was was something something neatly neatly covered covered up up with with a a large large white white cloth. cloth. i i could could not not make make out out what what that that was. was. 'traddles,' 'traddles,' said said i, i, shaking shaking hands hands with with him him again, again, after after i i had had sat sat down, down, 'i 'i am am delighted delighted to to see see you.' 'i 'i am am delighted delighted to to see see you, copperfield,' copperfield,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i am am very very glad glad indeed indeed to to see see you. it it was was because because i i was was thoroughly thoroughly glad glad to to see see you when when we we met met in in ely ely place, place, and and was was sure sure you were were thoroughly thoroughly glad glad to to see see me, me, that that i i gave gave you this this address address instead instead of of my my address address at at chambers.' chambers.' 'oh! 'oh! you have have chambers?' chambers?' said said i. i. 'why, 'why, i i have have the the fourth fourth of of a a room room and and a a passage, passage, and and the the fourth fourth of of a a clerk,' clerk,' returned returned traddles. traddles. 'three 'three others others and and myself myself unite unite to to have have a a set set of of chambers chambers -- -- to to look look business-like business-like -- -- and and we we quarter quarter the the clerk clerk too. too. half-a-crown half-a-crown a a week week he he costs costs me.' me.' his his old old simple simple character character and and good good temper, temper, and and something something of of his his old old unlucky unlucky fortune fortune also, also, i i thought, thought, smiled smiled at at me me in in the the smile smile with with which which he he made made this this explanation. explanation. 'it's 'it's not not because because i i have have the the least least pride, pride, copperfield, copperfield, you understand,' understand,' said said traddles, traddles, 'that 'that i i don't don't usually usually give give my my address address here. here. it's it's only only on on account account of of those those who who come come to to me, me, who who might might not not like like to to come come here. here. for for myself, myself, i i am am fighting fighting my my way way on on in in the the world world against against difficulties, difficulties, and and it it would would be be ridiculous ridiculous if if i i made made a a pretence pretence of of doing doing anything anything else.' else.' 'you are are reading reading for for the the bar, bar, mr. mr. waterbrook waterbrook informed informed me?' me?' said said i. i. 'why, 'why, yes,' yes,' said said traddles, traddles, rubbing rubbing his his hands hands slowly slowly over over one one another. another. 'i 'i am am reading reading for for the the bar. bar. the the fact fact is, is, i i have have just just begun begun to to keep keep my my terms, terms, after after rather rather a a long long delay. delay. it's it's some some time time since since i i was was articled, articled, but but the the payment payment of of that that hundred hundred pounds pounds was was a a great great pull. pull. a a great great pull!' pull!' said said traddles, traddles, with with a a wince, wince, as as if if he he had had had had a a tooth tooth out. out. 'do 'do you know know what what i i can't can't help help thinking thinking of, of, traddles, traddles, as as i i sit sit here here looking looking at at you?' i i asked asked him. him. 'no,' 'no,' said said he. he. 'that 'that sky-blue sky-blue suit suit you used used to to wear.' wear.' 'lord, 'lord, to to be be sure!' sure!' cried cried traddles, traddles, laughing. laughing. 'tight 'tight in in the the arms arms and and legs, legs, you know? know? dear dear me! me! well! well! those those were were happy happy times, times, weren't weren't they?' they?' 'i 'i think think our our schoolmaster schoolmaster might might have have made made them them happier, happier, without without doing doing any any harm harm to to any any of of us, us, i i acknowledge,' acknowledge,' i i returned. returned. 'perhaps 'perhaps he he might,' might,' said said traddles. traddles. 'but 'but dear dear me, me, there there was was a a good good deal deal of of fun fun going going on. on. do do you remember remember the the nights nights in in the the bedroom? bedroom? when when we we used used to to have have the the suppers? suppers? and and when when you used used to to tell tell the the stories? stories? ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! ha! and and do do you remember remember when when i i got got caned caned for for crying crying about about mr. mr. mell? mell? old old creakle! creakle! i i should should like like to to see see him him again, again, too!' too!' 'he 'he was was a a brute brute to to you, traddles,' traddles,' said said i, i, indignantly; indignantly; for for his his good good humour humour made made me me feel feel as as if if i i had had seen seen him him beaten beaten but but yesterday. yesterday. 'do 'do you think think so?' so?' returned returned traddles. traddles. 'really? 'really? perhaps perhaps he he was was rather. rather. but but it's it's all all over, over, a a long long while. while. old old creakle!' creakle!' 'you were were brought brought up up by by an an uncle, uncle, then?' then?' said said i. i. 'of 'of course course i i was!' was!' said said traddles. traddles. 'the 'the one one i i was was always always going going to to write write to. to. and and always always didn't, didn't, eh! eh! ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! ha! yes, yes, i i had had an an uncle uncle then. then. he he died died soon soon after after i i left left school.' school.' 'indeed!' 'indeed!' 'yes. 'yes. he he was was a a retired retired -- -- what what do do you call call it! it! -- -- draper draper -- -- cloth-merchant cloth-merchant -- -- and and had had made made me me his his heir. heir. but but he he didn't didn't like like me me when when i i grew grew up.' up.' 'do 'do you really really mean mean that?' that?' said said i. i. he he was was so so composed, composed, that that i i fancied fancied he he must must have have some some other other meaning. meaning. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, yes, yes, copperfield! copperfield! i i mean mean it,' it,' replied replied traddles. traddles. 'it 'it was was an an unfortunate unfortunate thing, thing, but but he he didn't didn't like like me me at at all. all. he he said said i i wasn't wasn't at at all all what what he he expected, expected, and and so so he he married married his his housekeeper.' housekeeper.' 'and 'and what what did did you do?' do?' i i asked. asked. 'i 'i didn't didn't do do anything anything in in particular,' particular,' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i lived lived with with them, them, waiting waiting to to be be put put out out in in the the world, world, until until his his gout gout unfortunately unfortunately flew flew to to his his stomach stomach -- -- and and so so he he died, died, and and so so she she married married a a young young man, man, and and so so i i wasn't wasn't provided provided for.' for.' 'did 'did you get get nothing, nothing, traddles, traddles, after after all?' all?' 'oh 'oh dear, dear, yes!' yes!' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i got got fifty fifty pounds. pounds. i i had had never never been been brought brought up up to to any any profession, profession, and and at at first first i i was was at at a a loss loss what what to to do do for for myself. myself. however, however, i i began, began, with with the the assistance assistance of of the the son son of of a a professional professional man, man, who who had had been been to to salem salem house house -- -- yawler, yawler, with with his his nose nose on on one one side. side. do do you recollect recollect him?' him?' no. no. he he had had not not been been there there with with me; me; all all the the noses noses were were straight straight in in my my day. day. 'it 'it don't don't matter,' matter,' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i began, began, by by means means of of his his assistance, assistance, to to copy copy law law writings. writings. that that didn't didn't answer answer very very well; well; and and then then i i began began to to state state cases cases for for them, them, and and make make abstracts, abstracts, and and that that sort sort of of work. work. for for i i am am a a plodding plodding kind kind of of fellow, fellow, copperfield, copperfield, and and had had learnt learnt the the way way of of doing doing such such things things pithily. pithily. well! well! that that put put it it in in my my head head to to enter enter myself myself as as a a law law student; student; and and that that ran ran away away with with all all that that was was left left of of the the fifty fifty pounds. pounds. yawler yawler recommended recommended me me to to one one or or two two other other offices, offices, however however -- -- mr. mr. waterbrook's waterbrook's for for one one -- -- and and i i got got a a good good many many jobs. jobs. i i was was fortunate fortunate enough, enough, too, too, to to become become acquainted acquainted with with a a person person in in the the publishing publishing way, way, who who was was getting getting up up an an encyclopaedia, encyclopaedia, and and he he set set me me to to work; work; and, and, indeed' indeed' (glancing (glancing at at his his table), table), 'i 'i am am at at work work for for him him at at this this minute. minute. i i am am not not a a bad bad compiler, compiler, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, preserving preserving the the same same air air of of cheerful cheerful confidence confidence in in all all he he said, said, 'but 'but i i have have no no invention invention at at all; all; not not a a particle. particle. i i suppose suppose there there never never was was a a young young man man with with less less originality originality than than i i have.' have.' as as traddles traddles seemed seemed to to expect expect that that i i should should assent assent to to this this as as a a matter matter of of course, course, i i nodded; nodded; and and he he went went on, on, with with the the same same sprightly sprightly patience patience -- -- i i can can find find no no better better expression expression -- -- as as before. before. 'so, 'so, by by little little and and little, little, and and not not living living high, high, i i managed managed to to scrape scrape up up the the hundred hundred pounds pounds at at last,' last,' said said traddles; traddles; 'and 'and thank thank heaven heaven that's that's paid paid -- -- though though it it was was -- -- though though it it certainly certainly was,' was,' said said traddles, traddles, wincing wincing again again as as if if he he had had had had another another tooth tooth out, out, 'a 'a pull. pull. i i am am living living by by the the sort sort of of work work i i have have mentioned, mentioned, still, still, and and i i hope, hope, one one of of these these days, days, to to get get connected connected with with some some newspaper: newspaper: which which would would almost almost be be the the making making of of my my fortune. fortune. now, now, copperfield, copperfield, you are are so so exactly exactly what what you used used to to be, be, with with that that agreeable agreeable face, face, and and it's it's so so pleasant pleasant to to see see you, that that i i sha'n't sha'n't conceal conceal anything. anything. therefore therefore you must must know know that that i i am am engaged.' engaged.' engaged! engaged! oh, oh, dora! dora! 'she 'she is is a a curate's curate's daughter,' daughter,' said said traddles; traddles; 'one 'one of of ten, ten, down down in in devonshire. devonshire. yes!' yes!' for for he he saw saw me me glance, glance, involuntarily, involuntarily, at at the the prospect prospect on on the the inkstand. inkstand. 'that's 'that's the the church! church! you come come round round here here to to the the left, left, out out of of this this gate,' gate,' tracing tracing his his finger finger along along the the inkstand, inkstand, 'and 'and exactly exactly where where i i hold hold this this pen, pen, there there stands stands the the house house -- -- facing, facing, you understand, understand, towards towards the the church.' church.' the the delight delight with with which which he he entered entered into into these these particulars, particulars, did did not not fully fully present present itself itself to to me me until until afterwards; afterwards; for for my my selfish selfish thoughts thoughts were were making making a a ground-plan ground-plan of of mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's house house and and garden garden at at the the same same moment. moment. 'she 'she is is such such a a dear dear girl!' girl!' said said traddles; traddles; 'a 'a little little older older than than me, me, but but the the dearest dearest girl! girl! i i told told you i i was was going going out out of of town? town? i i have have been been down down there. there. i i walked walked there, there, and and i i walked walked back, back, and and i i had had the the most most delightful delightful time! time! i i dare dare say say ours ours is is likely likely to to be be a a rather rather long long engagement, engagement, but but our our motto motto is is "wait "wait and and hope!" hope!" we we always always say say that. that. "wait "wait and and hope," hope," we we always always say. say. and and she she would would wait, wait, copperfield, copperfield, till till she she was was sixty sixty -- -- any any age age you can can mention mention -- -- for for me!' me!' traddles traddles rose rose from from his his chair, chair, and, and, with with a a triumphant triumphant smile, smile, put put his his hand hand upon upon the the white white cloth cloth i i had had observed. observed. 'however,' 'however,' he he said, said, 'it's 'it's not not that that we we haven't haven't made made a a beginning beginning towards towards housekeeping. housekeeping. no, no, no; no; we we have have begun. begun. we we must must get get on on by by degrees, degrees, but but we we have have begun. begun. here,' here,' drawing drawing the the cloth cloth off off with with great great pride pride and and care, care, 'are 'are two two pieces pieces of of furniture furniture to to commence commence with. with. this this flower-pot flower-pot and and stand, stand, she she bought bought herself. herself. you put put that that in in a a parlour parlour window,' window,' said said traddles, traddles, falling falling a a little little back back from from it it to to survey survey it it with with the the greater greater admiration, admiration, 'with 'with a a plant plant in in it, it, and and -- -- and and there there you are! are! this this little little round round table table with with the the marble marble top top (it's (it's two two feet feet ten ten in in circumference), circumference), i i bought. bought. you want want to to lay lay a a book book down, down, you know, know, or or somebody somebody comes comes to to see see you or or your your wife, wife, and and wants wants a a place place to to stand stand a a cup cup of of tea tea upon, upon, and and -- -- and and there there you are are again!' again!' said said traddles. traddles. 'it's 'it's an an admirable admirable piece piece of of workmanship workmanship -- -- firm firm as as a a rock!' rock!' i i praised praised them them both, both, highly, highly, and and traddles traddles replaced replaced the the covering covering as as carefully carefully as as he he had had removed removed it. it. 'it's 'it's not not a a great great deal deal towards towards the the furnishing,' furnishing,' said said traddles, traddles, 'but 'but it's it's something. something. the the table-cloths, table-cloths, and and pillow-cases, pillow-cases, and and articles articles of of that that kind, kind, are are what what discourage discourage me me most, most, copperfield. copperfield. so so does does the the ironmongery ironmongery -- -- candle-boxes, candle-boxes, and and gridirons, gridirons, and and that that sort sort of of necessaries necessaries -- -- because because those those things things tell, tell, and and mount mount up. up. however, however, "wait "wait and and hope!" hope!" and and i i assure assure you she's she's the the dearest dearest girl!' girl!' 'i 'i am am quite quite certain certain of of it,' it,' said said i. i. 'in 'in the the meantime,' meantime,' said said traddles, traddles, coming coming back back to to his his chair; chair; 'and 'and this this is is the the end end of of my my prosing prosing about about myself, myself, i i get get on on as as well well as as i i can. can. i i don't don't make make much, much, but but i i don't don't spend spend much. much. in in general, general, i i board board with with the the people people downstairs, downstairs, who who are are very very agreeable agreeable people people indeed. indeed. both both mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber have have seen seen a a good good deal deal of of life, life, and and are are excellent excellent company.' company.' 'my 'my dear dear traddles!' traddles!' i i quickly quickly exclaimed. exclaimed. 'what 'what are are you talking talking about?' about?' traddles traddles looked looked at at me, me, as as if if he he wondered wondered what what i i was was talking talking about. about. 'mr. 'mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber!' micawber!' i i repeated. repeated. 'why, 'why, i i am am intimately intimately acquainted acquainted with with them!' them!' an an opportune opportune double double knock knock at at the the door, door, which which i i knew knew well well from from old old experience experience in in windsor windsor terrace, terrace, and and which which nobody nobody but but mr. mr. micawber micawber could could ever ever have have knocked knocked at at that that door, door, resolved resolved any any doubt doubt in in my my mind mind as as to to their their being being my my old old friends. friends. i i begged begged traddles traddles to to ask ask his his landlord landlord to to walk walk up. up. traddles traddles accordingly accordingly did did so, so, over over the the banister; banister; and and mr. mr. micawber, micawber, not not a a bit bit changed changed -- -- his his tights, tights, his his stick, stick, his his shirt-collar, shirt-collar, and and his his eye-glass, eye-glass, all all the the same same as as ever ever -- -- came came into into the the room room with with a a genteel genteel and and youthful youthful air. air. 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, mr. mr. traddles,' traddles,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with the the old old roll roll in in his his voice, voice, as as he he checked checked himself himself in in humming humming a a soft soft tune. tune. 'i 'i was was not not aware aware that that there there was was any any individual, individual, alien alien to to this this tenement, tenement, in in your your sanctum.' sanctum.' mr. mr. micawber micawber slightly slightly bowed bowed to to me, me, and and pulled pulled up up his his shirt-collar. shirt-collar. 'how 'how do do you do, do, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' said said i. i. 'sir,' 'sir,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'you are are exceedingly exceedingly obliging. obliging. i i am am in in statu statu quo.' quo.' 'and 'and mrs. mrs. micawber?' micawber?' i i pursued. pursued. 'sir,' 'sir,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'she 'she is is also, also, thank thank god, god, in in statu statu quo.' quo.' 'and 'and the the children, children, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' 'sir,' 'sir,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i rejoice rejoice to to reply reply that that they they are, are, likewise, likewise, in in the the enjoyment enjoyment of of salubrity.' salubrity.' all all this this time, time, mr. mr. micawber micawber had had not not known known me me in in the the least, least, though though he he had had stood stood face face to to face face with with me. me. but but now, now, seeing seeing me me smile, smile, he he examined examined my my features features with with more more attention, attention, fell fell back, back, cried, cried, 'is 'is it it possible! possible! have have i i the the pleasure pleasure of of again again beholding beholding copperfield!' copperfield!' and and shook shook me me by by both both hands hands with with the the utmost utmost fervour. fervour. 'good 'good heaven, heaven, mr. mr. traddles!' traddles!' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'to 'to think think that that i i should should find find you acquainted acquainted with with the the friend friend of of my my youth, youth, the the companion companion of of earlier earlier days! days! my my dear!' dear!' calling calling over over the the banisters banisters to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, while while traddles traddles looked looked (with (with reason) reason) not not a a little little amazed amazed at at this this description description of of me. me. 'here 'here is is a a gentleman gentleman in in mr. mr. traddles's traddles's apartment, apartment, whom whom he he wishes wishes to to have have the the pleasure pleasure of of presenting presenting to to you, my my love!' love!' mr. mr. micawber micawber immediately immediately reappeared, reappeared, and and shook shook hands hands with with me me again. again. 'and 'and how how is is our our good good friend friend the the doctor, doctor, copperfield?' copperfield?' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'and 'and all all the the circle circle at at canterbury?' canterbury?' 'i 'i have have none none but but good good accounts accounts of of them,' them,' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am most most delighted delighted to to hear hear it,' it,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'it 'it was was at at canterbury canterbury where where we we last last met. met. within within the the shadow, shadow, i i may may figuratively figuratively say, say, of of that that religious religious edifice edifice immortalized immortalized by by chaucer, chaucer, which which was was anciently anciently the the resort resort of of pilgrims pilgrims from from the the remotest remotest corners corners of of -- -- in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'in 'in the the immediate immediate neighbourhood neighbourhood of of the the cathedral.' cathedral.' i i replied replied that that it it was. was. mr. mr. micawber micawber continued continued talking talking as as volubly volubly as as he he could; could; but but not, not, i i thought, thought, without without showing, showing, by by some some marks marks of of concern concern in in his his countenance, countenance, that that he he was was sensible sensible of of sounds sounds in in the the next next room, room, as as of of mrs. mrs. micawber micawber washing washing her her hands, hands, and and hurriedly hurriedly opening opening and and shutting shutting drawers drawers that that were were uneasy uneasy in in their their action. action. 'you find find us, us, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with one one eye eye on on traddles, traddles, 'at 'at present present established, established, on on what what may may be be designated designated as as a a small small and and unassuming unassuming scale; scale; but, but, you are are aware aware that that i i have, have, in in the the course course of of my my career, career, surmounted surmounted difficulties, difficulties, and and conquered conquered obstacles. obstacles. you are are no no stranger stranger to to the the fact, fact, that that there there have have been been periods periods of of my my life, life, when when it it has has been been requisite requisite that that i i should should pause, pause, until until certain certain expected expected events events should should turn turn up; up; when when it it has has been been necessary necessary that that i i should should fall fall back, back, before before making making what what i i trust trust i i shall shall not not be be accused accused of of presumption presumption in in terming terming -- -- a a spring. spring. the the present present is is one one of of those those momentous momentous stages stages in in the the life life of of man. man. you find find me, me, fallen fallen back, back, for for a a spring; spring; and and i i have have every every reason reason to to believe believe that that a a vigorous vigorous leap leap will will shortly shortly be be the the result.' result.' i i was was expressing expressing my my satisfaction, satisfaction, when when mrs. mrs. micawber micawber came came in; in; a a little little more more slatternly slatternly than than she she used used to to be, be, or or so so she she seemed seemed now, now, to to my my unaccustomed unaccustomed eyes, eyes, but but still still with with some some preparation preparation of of herself herself for for company, company, and and with with a a pair pair of of brown brown gloves gloves on. on. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, leading leading her her towards towards me, me, 'here 'here is is a a gentleman gentleman of of the the name name of of copperfield, copperfield, who who wishes wishes to to renew renew his his acquaintance acquaintance with with you.' it it would would have have been been better, better, as as it it turned turned out, out, to to have have led led gently gently up up to to this this announcement, announcement, for for mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, being being in in a a delicate delicate state state of of health, health, was was overcome overcome by by it, it, and and was was taken taken so so unwell, unwell, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber was was obliged, obliged, in in great great trepidation, trepidation, to to run run down down to to the the water-butt water-butt in in the the backyard, backyard, and and draw draw a a basinful basinful to to lave lave her her brow brow with. with. she she presently presently revived, revived, however, however, and and was was really really pleased pleased to to see see me. me. we we had had half-an-hour's half-an-hour's talk, talk, all all together; together; and and i i asked asked her her about about the the twins, twins, who, who, she she said, said, were were 'grown 'grown great great creatures'; creatures'; and and after after master master and and miss miss micawber, micawber, whom whom she she described described as as 'absolute 'absolute giants', giants', but but they they were were not not produced produced on on that that occasion. occasion. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was very very anxious anxious that that i i should should stay stay to to dinner. dinner. i i should should not not have have been been averse averse to to do do so, so, but but that that i i imagined imagined i i detected detected trouble, trouble, and and calculation calculation relative relative to to the the extent extent of of the the cold cold meat, meat, in in mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's eye. eye. i i therefore therefore pleaded pleaded another another engagement; engagement; and and observing observing that that mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's spirits spirits were were immediately immediately lightened, lightened, i i resisted resisted all all persuasion persuasion to to forego forego it. it. but but i i told told traddles, traddles, and and mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, that that before before i i could could think think of of leaving, leaving, they they must must appoint appoint a a day day when when they they would would come come and and dine dine with with me. me. the the occupations occupations to to which which traddles traddles stood stood pledged, pledged, rendered rendered it it necessary necessary to to fix fix a a somewhat somewhat distant distant one; one; but but an an appointment appointment was was made made for for the the purpose, purpose, that that suited suited us us all, all, and and then then i i took took my my leave. leave. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, under under pretence pretence of of showing showing me me a a nearer nearer way way than than that that by by which which i i had had come, come, accompanied accompanied me me to to the the corner corner of of the the street; street; being being anxious anxious (he (he explained explained to to me) me) to to say say a a few few words words to to an an old old friend, friend, in in confidence. confidence. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i need need hardly hardly tell tell you that that to to have have beneath beneath our our roof, roof, under under existing existing circumstances, circumstances, a a mind mind like like that that which which gleams gleams -- -- if if i i may may be be allowed allowed the the expression expression -- -- which which gleams gleams -- -- in in your your friend friend traddles, traddles, is is an an unspeakable unspeakable comfort. comfort. with with a a washerwoman, washerwoman, who who exposes exposes hard-bake hard-bake for for sale sale in in her her parlour-window, parlour-window, dwelling dwelling next next door, door, and and a a bow-street bow-street officer officer residing residing over over the the way, way, you may may imagine imagine that that his his society society is is a a source source of of consolation consolation to to myself myself and and to to mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. i i am am at at present, present, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, engaged engaged in in the the sale sale of of corn corn upon upon commission. commission. it it is is not not an an avocation avocation of of a a remunerative remunerative description description -- -- in in other other words, words, it it does does not not pay pay -- -- and and some some temporary temporary embarrassments embarrassments of of a a pecuniary pecuniary nature nature have have been been the the consequence. consequence. i i am, am, however, however, delighted delighted to to add add that that i i have have now now an an immediate immediate prospect prospect of of something something turning turning up up (i (i am am not not at at liberty liberty to to say say in in what what direction), direction), which which i i trust trust will will enable enable me me to to provide, provide, permanently, permanently, both both for for myself myself and and for for your your friend friend traddles, traddles, in in whom whom i i have have an an unaffected unaffected interest. interest. you may, may, perhaps, perhaps, be be prepared prepared to to hear hear that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber is is in in a a state state of of health health which which renders renders it it not not wholly wholly improbable improbable that that an an addition addition may may be be ultimately ultimately made made to to those those pledges pledges of of affection affection which which -- -- in in short, short, to to the the infantine infantine group. group. mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's family family have have been been so so good good as as to to express express their their dissatisfaction dissatisfaction at at this this state state of of things. things. i i have have merely merely to to observe, observe, that that i i am am not not aware aware that that it it is is any any business business of of theirs, theirs, and and that that i i repel repel that that exhibition exhibition of of feeling feeling with with scorn, scorn, and and with with defiance!' defiance!' mr. mr. micawber micawber then then shook shook hands hands with with me me again, again, and and left left me. me. chapter chapter 28. 28. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's gauntlet gauntlet until until the the day day arrived arrived on on which which i i was was to to entertain entertain my my newly-found newly-found old old friends, friends, i i lived lived principally principally on on dora dora and and coffee. coffee. in in my my love-lorn love-lorn condition, condition, my my appetite appetite languished; languished; and and i i was was glad glad of of it, it, for for i i felt felt as as though though it it would would have have been been an an act act of of perfidy perfidy towards towards dora dora to to have have a a natural natural relish relish for for my my dinner. dinner. the the quantity quantity of of walking walking exercise exercise i i took, took, was was not not in in this this respect respect attended attended with with its its usual usual consequence, consequence, as as the the disappointment disappointment counteracted counteracted the the fresh fresh air. air. i i have have my my doubts, doubts, too, too, founded founded on on the the acute acute experience experience acquired acquired at at this this period period of of my my life, life, whether whether a a sound sound enjoyment enjoyment of of animal animal food food can can develop develop itself itself freely freely in in any any human human subject subject who who is is always always in in torment torment from from tight tight boots. boots. i i think think the the extremities extremities require require to to be be at at peace peace before before the the stomach stomach will will conduct conduct itself itself with with vigour. vigour. on on the the occasion occasion of of this this domestic domestic little little party, party, i i did did not not repeat repeat my my former former extensive extensive preparations. preparations. i i merely merely provided provided a a pair pair of of soles, soles, a a small small leg leg of of mutton, mutton, and and a a pigeon-pie. pigeon-pie. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp broke broke out out into into rebellion rebellion on on my my first first bashful bashful hint hint in in reference reference to to the the cooking cooking of of the the fish fish and and joint, joint, and and said, said, with with a a dignified dignified sense sense of of injury, injury, 'no! 'no! no, no, sir! sir! you will will not not ask ask me me sich sich a a thing, thing, for for you are are better better acquainted acquainted with with me me than than to to suppose suppose me me capable capable of of doing doing what what i i cannot cannot do do with with ampial ampial satisfaction satisfaction to to my my own own feelings!' feelings!' but, but, in in the the end, end, a a compromise compromise was was effected; effected; and and mrs. mrs. crupp crupp consented consented to to achieve achieve this this feat, feat, on on condition condition that that i i dined dined from from home home for for a a fortnight fortnight afterwards. afterwards. and and here here i i may may remark, remark, that that what what i i underwent underwent from from mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, in in consequence consequence of of the the tyranny tyranny she she established established over over me, me, was was dreadful. dreadful. i i never never was was so so much much afraid afraid of of anyone. anyone. we we made made a a compromise compromise of of everything. everything. if if i i hesitated, hesitated, she she was was taken taken with with that that wonderful wonderful disorder disorder which which was was always always lying lying in in ambush ambush in in her her system, system, ready, ready, at at the the shortest shortest notice, notice, to to prey prey upon upon her her vitals. vitals. if if i i rang rang the the bell bell impatiently, impatiently, after after half-a-dozen half-a-dozen unavailing unavailing modest modest pulls, pulls, and and she she appeared appeared at at last last -- -- which which was was not not by by any any means means to to be be relied relied upon upon -- -- she she would would appear appear with with a a reproachful reproachful aspect, aspect, sink sink breathless breathless on on a a chair chair near near the the door, door, lay lay her her hand hand upon upon her her nankeen nankeen bosom, bosom, and and become become so so ill, ill, that that i i was was glad, glad, at at any any sacrifice sacrifice of of brandy brandy or or anything anything else, else, to to get get rid rid of of her. her. if if i i objected objected to to having having my my bed bed made made at at five five o'clock o'clock in in the the afternoon afternoon -- -- which which i i do do still still think think an an uncomfortable uncomfortable arrangement arrangement -- -- one one motion motion of of her her hand hand towards towards the the same same nankeen nankeen region region of of wounded wounded sensibility sensibility was was enough enough to to make make me me falter falter an an apology. apology. in in short, short, i i would would have have done done anything anything in in an an honourable honourable way way rather rather than than give give mrs. mrs. crupp crupp offence; offence; and and she she was was the the terror terror of of my my life. life. i i bought bought a a second-hand second-hand dumb-waiter dumb-waiter for for this this dinner-party, dinner-party, in in preference preference to to re-engaging re-engaging the the handy handy young young man; man; against against whom whom i i had had conceived conceived a a prejudice, prejudice, in in consequence consequence of of meeting meeting him him in in the the strand, strand, one one sunday sunday morning, morning, in in a a waistcoat waistcoat remarkably remarkably like like one one of of mine, mine, which which had had been been missing missing since since the the former former occasion. occasion. the the 'young 'young gal' gal' was was re-engaged; re-engaged; but but on on the the stipulation stipulation that that she she should should only only bring bring in in the the dishes, dishes, and and then then withdraw withdraw to to the the landing-place, landing-place, beyond beyond the the outer outer door; door; where where a a habit habit of of sniffing sniffing she she had had contracted contracted would would be be lost lost upon upon the the guests, guests, and and where where her her retiring retiring on on the the plates plates would would be be a a physical physical impossibility. impossibility. having having laid laid in in the the materials materials for for a a bowl bowl of of punch, punch, to to be be compounded compounded by by mr. mr. micawber; micawber; having having provided provided a a bottle bottle of of lavender-water, lavender-water, two two wax-candles, wax-candles, a a paper paper of of mixed mixed pins, pins, and and a a pincushion, pincushion, to to assist assist mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in her her toilette toilette at at my my dressing-table; dressing-table; having having also also caused caused the the fire fire in in my my bedroom bedroom to to be be lighted lighted for for mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's convenience; convenience; and and having having laid laid the the cloth cloth with with my my own own hands, hands, i i awaited awaited the the result result with with composure. composure. at at the the appointed appointed time, time, my my three three visitors visitors arrived arrived together. together. mr. mr. micawber micawber with with more more shirt-collar shirt-collar than than usual, usual, and and a a new new ribbon ribbon to to his his eye-glass; eye-glass; mrs. mrs. micawber micawber with with her her cap cap in in a a whitey-brown whitey-brown paper paper parcel; parcel; traddles traddles carrying carrying the the parcel, parcel, and and supporting supporting mrs. mrs. micawber micawber on on his his arm. arm. they they were were all all delighted delighted with with my my residence. residence. when when i i conducted conducted mrs. mrs. micawber micawber to to my my dressing-table, dressing-table, and and she she saw saw the the scale scale on on which which it it was was prepared prepared for for her, her, she she was was in in such such raptures, raptures, that that she she called called mr. mr. micawber micawber to to come come in in and and look. look. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'this 'this is is luxurious. luxurious. this this is is a a way way of of life life which which reminds reminds me me of of the the period period when when i i was was myself myself in in a a state state of of celibacy, celibacy, and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had not not yet yet been been solicited solicited to to plight plight her her faith faith at at the the hymeneal hymeneal altar.' altar.' 'he 'he means, means, solicited solicited by by him, him, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, archly. archly. 'he 'he cannot cannot answer answer for for others.' others.' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber micawber with with sudden sudden seriousness, seriousness, 'i 'i have have no no desire desire to to answer answer for for others. others. i i am am too too well well aware aware that that when, when, in in the the inscrutable inscrutable decrees decrees of of fate, fate, you were were reserved reserved for for me, me, it it is is possible possible you may may have have been been reserved reserved for for one, one, destined, destined, after after a a protracted protracted struggle, struggle, at at length length to to fall fall a a victim victim to to pecuniary pecuniary involvements involvements of of a a complicated complicated nature. nature. i i understand understand your your allusion, allusion, my my love. love. i i regret regret it, it, but but i i can can bear bear it.' it.' 'micawber!' 'micawber!' exclaimed exclaimed mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, in in tears. tears. 'have 'have i i deserved deserved this! this! i, i, who who never never have have deserted deserted you; who who never never will will desert desert you, micawber!' micawber!' 'my 'my love,' love,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, much much affected, affected, 'you will will forgive, forgive, and and our our old old and and tried tried friend friend copperfield copperfield will, will, i i am am sure, sure, forgive, forgive, the the momentary momentary laceration laceration of of a a wounded wounded spirit, spirit, made made sensitive sensitive by by a a recent recent collision collision with with the the minion minion of of power power -- -- in in other other words, words, with with a a ribald ribald turncock turncock attached attached to to the the water-works water-works -- -- and and will will pity, pity, not not condemn, condemn, its its excesses.' excesses.' mr. mr. micawber micawber then then embraced embraced mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and pressed pressed my my hand; hand; leaving leaving me me to to infer infer from from this this broken broken allusion allusion that that his his domestic domestic supply supply of of water water had had been been cut cut off off that that afternoon, afternoon, in in consequence consequence of of default default in in the the payment payment of of the the company's company's rates. rates. to to divert divert his his thoughts thoughts from from this this melancholy melancholy subject, subject, i i informed informed mr. mr. micawber micawber that that i i relied relied upon upon him him for for a a bowl bowl of of punch, punch, and and led led him him to to the the lemons. lemons. his his recent recent despondency, despondency, not not to to say say despair, despair, was was gone gone in in a a moment. moment. i i never never saw saw a a man man so so thoroughly thoroughly enjoy enjoy himself himself amid amid the the fragrance fragrance of of lemon-peel lemon-peel and and sugar, sugar, the the odour odour of of burning burning rum, rum, and and the the steam steam of of boiling boiling water, water, as as mr. mr. micawber micawber did did that that afternoon. afternoon. it it was was wonderful wonderful to to see see his his face face shining shining at at us us out out of of a a thin thin cloud cloud of of these these delicate delicate fumes, fumes, as as he he stirred, stirred, and and mixed, mixed, and and tasted, tasted, and and looked looked as as if if he he were were making, making, instead instead of of punch, punch, a a fortune fortune for for his his family family down down to to the the latest latest posterity. posterity. as as to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, i i don't don't know know whether whether it it was was the the effect effect of of the the cap, cap, or or the the lavender-water, lavender-water, or or the the pins, pins, or or the the fire, fire, or or the the wax-candles, wax-candles, but but she she came came out out of of my my room, room, comparatively comparatively speaking, speaking, lovely. lovely. and and the the lark lark was was never never gayer gayer than than that that excellent excellent woman. woman. i i suppose suppose -- -- i i never never ventured ventured to to inquire, inquire, but but i i suppose suppose -- -- that that mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, after after frying frying the the soles, soles, was was taken taken ill. ill. because because we we broke broke down down at at that that point. point. the the leg leg of of mutton mutton came came up up very very red red within, within, and and very very pale pale without: without: besides besides having having a a foreign foreign substance substance of of a a gritty gritty nature nature sprinkled sprinkled over over it, it, as as if if if if had had had had a a fall fall into into the the ashes ashes of of that that remarkable remarkable kitchen kitchen fireplace. fireplace. but but we we were were not not in in condition condition to to judge judge of of this this fact fact from from the the appearance appearance of of the the gravy, gravy, forasmuch forasmuch as as the the 'young 'young gal' gal' had had dropped dropped it it all all upon upon the the stairs stairs -- -- where where it it remained, remained, by by the the by, by, in in a a long long train, train, until until it it was was worn worn out. out. the the pigeon-pie pigeon-pie was was not not bad, bad, but but it it was was a a delusive delusive pie: pie: the the crust crust being being like like a a disappointing disappointing head, head, phrenologically phrenologically speaking: speaking: full full of of lumps lumps and and bumps, bumps, with with nothing nothing particular particular underneath. underneath. in in short, short, the the banquet banquet was was such such a a failure failure that that i i should should have have been been quite quite unhappy unhappy -- -- about about the the failure, failure, i i mean, mean, for for i i was was always always unhappy unhappy about about dora dora -- -- if if i i had had not not been been relieved relieved by by the the great great good good humour humour of of my my company, company, and and by by a a bright bright suggestion suggestion from from mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'my 'my dear dear friend friend copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'accidents 'accidents will will occur occur in in the the best-regulated best-regulated families; families; and and in in families families not not regulated regulated by by that that pervading pervading influence influence which which sanctifies sanctifies while while it it enhances enhances the the -- -- a a -- -- i i would would say, say, in in short, short, by by the the influence influence of of woman, woman, in in the the lofty lofty character character of of wife, wife, they they may may be be expected expected with with confidence, confidence, and and must must be be borne borne with with philosophy. philosophy. if if you will will allow allow me me to to take take the the liberty liberty of of remarking remarking that that there there are are few few comestibles comestibles better, better, in in their their way, way, than than a a devil, devil, and and that that i i believe, believe, with with a a little little division division of of labour, labour, we we could could accomplish accomplish a a good good one one if if the the young young person person in in attendance attendance could could produce produce a a gridiron, gridiron, i i would would put put it it to to you, that that this this little little misfortune misfortune may may be be easily easily repaired.' repaired.' there there was was a a gridiron gridiron in in the the pantry, pantry, on on which which my my morning morning rasher rasher of of bacon bacon was was cooked. cooked. we we had had it it in, in, in in a a twinkling, twinkling, and and immediately immediately applied applied ourselves ourselves to to carrying carrying mr. mr. micawber's micawber's idea idea into into effect. effect. the the division division of of labour labour to to which which he he had had referred referred was was this: this: -- -- traddles traddles cut cut the the mutton mutton into into slices; slices; mr. mr. micawber micawber (who (who could could do do anything anything of of this this sort sort to to perfection) perfection) covered covered them them with with pepper, pepper, mustard, mustard, salt, salt, and and cayenne; cayenne; i i put put them them on on the the gridiron, gridiron, turned turned them them with with a a fork, fork, and and took took them them off, off, under under mr. mr. micawber's micawber's direction; direction; and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber heated, heated, and and continually continually stirred, stirred, some some mushroom mushroom ketchup ketchup in in a a little little saucepan. saucepan. when when we we had had slices slices enough enough done done to to begin begin upon, upon, we we fell-to, fell-to, with with our our sleeves sleeves still still tucked tucked up up at at the the wrist, wrist, more more slices slices sputtering sputtering and and blazing blazing on on the the fire, fire, and and our our attention attention divided divided between between the the mutton mutton on on our our plates, plates, and and the the mutton mutton then then preparing. preparing. what what with with the the novelty novelty of of this this cookery, cookery, the the excellence excellence of of it, it, the the bustle bustle of of it, it, the the frequent frequent starting starting up up to to look look after after it, it, the the frequent frequent sitting sitting down down to to dispose dispose of of it it as as the the crisp crisp slices slices came came off off the the gridiron gridiron hot hot and and hot, hot, the the being being so so busy, busy, so so flushed flushed with with the the fire, fire, so so amused, amused, and and in in the the midst midst of of such such a a tempting tempting noise noise and and savour, savour, we we reduced reduced the the leg leg of of mutton mutton to to the the bone. bone. my my own own appetite appetite came came back back miraculously. miraculously. i i am am ashamed ashamed to to record record it, it, but but i i really really believe believe i i forgot forgot dora dora for for a a little little while. while. i i am am satisfied satisfied that that mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber could could not not have have enjoyed enjoyed the the feast feast more, more, if if they they had had sold sold a a bed bed to to provide provide it. it. traddles traddles laughed laughed as as heartily, heartily, almost almost the the whole whole time, time, as as he he ate ate and and worked. worked. indeed indeed we we all all did, did, all all at at once; once; and and i i dare dare say say there there was was never never a a greater greater success. success. we we were were at at the the height height of of our our enjoyment, enjoyment, and and were were all all busily busily engaged, engaged, in in our our several several departments, departments, endeavouring endeavouring to to bring bring the the last last batch batch of of slices slices to to a a state state of of perfection perfection that that should should crown crown the the feast, feast, when when i i was was aware aware of of a a strange strange presence presence in in the the room, room, and and my my eyes eyes encountered encountered those those of of the the staid staid littimer, littimer, standing standing hat hat in in hand hand before before me. me. 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' i i involuntarily involuntarily asked. asked. 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir, sir, i i was was directed directed to to come come in. in. is is my my master master not not here, here, sir?' sir?' 'no.' 'no.' 'have 'have you not not seen seen him, him, sir?' sir?' 'no; 'no; don't don't you come come from from him?' him?' 'not 'not immediately immediately so, so, sir.' sir.' 'did 'did he he tell tell you you would would find find him him here?' here?' 'not 'not exactly exactly so, so, sir. sir. but but i i should should think think he he might might be be here here tomorrow, tomorrow, as as he he has has not not been been here here today.' today.' 'is 'is he he coming coming up up from from oxford?' oxford?' 'i 'i beg, beg, sir,' sir,' he he returned returned respectfully, respectfully, 'that 'that you will will be be seated, seated, and and allow allow me me to to do do this.' this.' with with which which he he took took the the fork fork from from my my unresisting unresisting hand, hand, and and bent bent over over the the gridiron, gridiron, as as if if his his whole whole attention attention were were concentrated concentrated on on it. it. we we should should not not have have been been much much discomposed, discomposed, i i dare dare say, say, by by the the appearance appearance of of steerforth steerforth himself, himself, but but we we became became in in a a moment moment the the meekest meekest of of the the meek meek before before his his respectable respectable serving-man. serving-man. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, humming humming a a tune, tune, to to show show that that he he was was quite quite at at ease, ease, subsided subsided into into his his chair, chair, with with the the handle handle of of a a hastily hastily concealed concealed fork fork sticking sticking out out of of the the bosom bosom of of his his coat, coat, as as if if he he had had stabbed stabbed himself. himself. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber put put on on her her brown brown gloves, gloves, and and assumed assumed a a genteel genteel languor. languor. traddles traddles ran ran his his greasy greasy hands hands through through his his hair, hair, and and stood stood it it bolt bolt upright, upright, and and stared stared in in confusion confusion on on the the table-cloth. table-cloth. as as for for me, me, i i was was a a mere mere infant infant at at the the head head of of my my own own table; table; and and hardly hardly ventured ventured to to glance glance at at the the respectable respectable phenomenon, phenomenon, who who had had come come from from heaven heaven knows knows where, where, to to put put my my establishment establishment to to rights. rights. meanwhile meanwhile he he took took the the mutton mutton off off the the gridiron, gridiron, and and gravely gravely handed handed it it round. round. we we all all took took some, some, but but our our appreciation appreciation of of it it was was gone, gone, and and we we merely merely made made a a show show of of eating eating it. it. as as we we severally severally pushed pushed away away our our plates, plates, he he noiselessly noiselessly removed removed them, them, and and set set on on the the cheese. cheese. he he took took that that off, off, too, too, when when it it was was done done with; with; cleared cleared the the table; table; piled piled everything everything on on the the dumb-waiter; dumb-waiter; gave gave us us our our wine-glasses; wine-glasses; and, and, of of his his own own accord, accord, wheeled wheeled the the dumb-waiter dumb-waiter into into the the pantry. pantry. all all this this was was done done in in a a perfect perfect manner, manner, and and he he never never raised raised his his eyes eyes from from what what he he was was about. about. yet yet his his very very elbows, elbows, when when he he had had his his back back towards towards me, me, seemed seemed to to teem teem with with the the expression expression of of his his fixed fixed opinion opinion that that i i was was extremely extremely young. young. 'can 'can i i do do anything anything more, more, sir?' sir?' i i thanked thanked him him and and said, said, no; no; but but would would he he take take no no dinner dinner himself? himself? 'none, 'none, i i am am obliged obliged to to you, sir.' sir.' 'is 'is mr. mr. steerforth steerforth coming coming from from oxford?' oxford?' 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir?' sir?' 'is 'is mr. mr. steerforth steerforth coming coming from from oxford?' oxford?' 'i 'i should should imagine imagine that that he he might might be be here here tomorrow, tomorrow, sir. sir. i i rather rather thought thought he he might might have have been been here here today, today, sir. sir. the the mistake mistake is is mine, mine, no no doubt, doubt, sir.' sir.' 'if 'if you should should see see him him first first -- -- ' ' said said i. i. 'if 'if you'll you'll excuse excuse me, me, sir, sir, i i don't don't think think i i shall shall see see him him first.' first.' 'in 'in case case you do,' do,' said said i, i, 'pray 'pray say say that that i i am am sorry sorry he he was was not not here here today, today, as as an an old old schoolfellow schoolfellow of of his his was was here.' here.' 'indeed, 'indeed, sir!' sir!' and and he he divided divided a a bow bow between between me me and and traddles, traddles, with with a a glance glance at at the the latter. latter. he he was was moving moving softly softly to to the the door, door, when, when, in in a a forlorn forlorn hope hope of of saying saying something something naturally naturally -- -- which which i i never never could, could, to to this this man man -- -- i i said: said: 'oh! 'oh! littimer!' littimer!' 'sir!' 'sir!' 'did 'did you remain remain long long at at yarmouth, yarmouth, that that time?' time?' 'not 'not particularly particularly so, so, sir.' sir.' 'you saw saw the the boat boat completed?' completed?' 'yes, 'yes, sir. sir. i i remained remained behind behind on on purpose purpose to to see see the the boat boat completed.' completed.' 'i 'i know!' know!' he he raised raised his his eyes eyes to to mine mine respectfully. respectfully. 'mr. 'mr. steerforth steerforth has has not not seen seen it it yet, yet, i i suppose?' suppose?' 'i 'i really really can't can't say, say, sir. sir. i i think think -- -- but but i i really really can't can't say, say, sir. sir. i i wish wish you good good night, night, sir.' sir.' he he comprehended comprehended everybody everybody present, present, in in the the respectful respectful bow bow with with which which he he followed followed these these words, words, and and disappeared. disappeared. my my visitors visitors seemed seemed to to breathe breathe more more freely freely when when he he was was gone; gone; but but my my own own relief relief was was very very great, great, for for besides besides the the constraint, constraint, arising arising from from that that extraordinary extraordinary sense sense of of being being at at a a disadvantage disadvantage which which i i always always had had in in this this man's man's presence, presence, my my conscience conscience had had embarrassed embarrassed me me with with whispers whispers that that i i had had mistrusted mistrusted his his master, master, and and i i could could not not repress repress a a vague vague uneasy uneasy dread dread that that he he might might find find it it out. out. how how was was it, it, having having so so little little in in reality reality to to conceal, conceal, that that i i always always did did feel feel as as if if this this man man were were finding finding me me out? out? mr. mr. micawber micawber roused roused me me from from this this reflection, reflection, which which was was blended blended with with a a certain certain remorseful remorseful apprehension apprehension of of seeing seeing steerforth steerforth himself, himself, by by bestowing bestowing many many encomiums encomiums on on the the absent absent littimer littimer as as a a most most respectable respectable fellow, fellow, and and a a thoroughly thoroughly admirable admirable servant. servant. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, i i may may remark, remark, had had taken taken his his full full share share of of the the general general bow, bow, and and had had received received it it with with infinite infinite condescension. condescension. 'but 'but punch, punch, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, tasting tasting it, it, 'like 'like time time and and tide, tide, waits waits for for no no man. man. ah! ah! it it is is at at the the present present moment moment in in high high flavour. flavour. my my love, love, will will you give give me me your your opinion?' opinion?' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber pronounced pronounced it it excellent. excellent. 'then 'then i i will will drink,' drink,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'if 'if my my friend friend copperfield copperfield will will permit permit me me to to take take that that social social liberty, liberty, to to the the days days when when my my friend friend copperfield copperfield and and myself myself were were younger, younger, and and fought fought our our way way in in the the world world side side by by side. side. i i may may say, say, of of myself myself and and copperfield, copperfield, in in words words we we have have sung sung together together before before now, now, that that we we twa twa hae hae run run about about the the braes braes and and pu'd pu'd the the gowans' gowans' fine fine -- -- in in a a figurative figurative point point of of view view -- -- on on several several occasions. occasions. i i am am not not exactly exactly aware,' aware,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with the the old old roll roll in in his his voice, voice, and and the the old old indescribable indescribable air air of of saying saying something something genteel, genteel, 'what 'what gowans gowans may may be, be, but but i i have have no no doubt doubt that that copperfield copperfield and and myself myself would would frequently frequently have have taken taken a a pull pull at at them, them, if if it it had had been been feasible.' feasible.' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, at at the the then then present present moment, moment, took took a a pull pull at at his his punch. punch. so so we we all all did: did: traddles traddles evidently evidently lost lost in in wondering wondering at at what what distant distant time time mr. mr. micawber micawber and and i i could could have have been been comrades comrades in in the the battle battle of of the the world. world. 'ahem!' 'ahem!' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, clearing clearing his his throat, throat, and and warming warming with with the the punch punch and and with with the the fire. fire. 'my 'my dear, dear, another another glass?' glass?' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber said said it it must must be be very very little; little; but but we we couldn't couldn't allow allow that, that, so so it it was was a a glassful. glassful. 'as 'as we we are are quite quite confidential confidential here, here, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, sipping sipping her her punch, punch, 'mr. 'mr. traddles traddles being being a a part part of of our our domesticity, domesticity, i i should should much much like like to to have have your your opinion opinion on on mr. mr. micawber's micawber's prospects. prospects. for for corn,' corn,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber micawber argumentatively, argumentatively, 'as 'as i i have have repeatedly repeatedly said said to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, may may be be gentlemanly, gentlemanly, but but it it is is not not remunerative. remunerative. commission commission to to the the extent extent of of two two and and ninepence ninepence in in a a fortnight fortnight cannot, cannot, however however limited limited our our ideas, ideas, be be considered considered remunerative.' remunerative.' we we were were all all agreed agreed upon upon that. that. 'then,' 'then,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, who who prided prided herself herself on on taking taking a a clear clear view view of of things, things, and and keeping keeping mr. mr. micawber micawber straight straight by by her her woman's woman's wisdom, wisdom, when when he he might might otherwise otherwise go go a a little little crooked, crooked, 'then 'then i i ask ask myself myself this this question. question. if if corn corn is is not not to to be be relied relied upon, upon, what what is? is? are are coals coals to to be be relied relied upon? upon? not not at at all. all. we we have have turned turned our our attention attention to to that that experiment, experiment, on on the the suggestion suggestion of of my my family, family, and and we we find find it it fallacious.' fallacious.' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, leaning leaning back back in in his his chair chair with with his his hands hands in in his his pockets, pockets, eyed eyed us us aside, aside, and and nodded nodded his his head, head, as as much much as as to to say say that that the the case case was was very very clearly clearly put. put. 'the 'the articles articles of of corn corn and and coals,' coals,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, still still more more argumentatively, argumentatively, 'being 'being equally equally out out of of the the question, question, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i naturally naturally look look round round the the world, world, and and say, say, "what "what is is there there in in which which a a person person of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's talent talent is is likely likely to to succeed?" succeed?" and and i i exclude exclude the the doing doing anything anything on on commission, commission, because because commission commission is is not not a a certainty. certainty. what what is is best best suited suited to to a a person person of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's peculiar peculiar temperament temperament is, is, i i am am convinced, convinced, a a certainty.' certainty.' traddles traddles and and i i both both expressed, expressed, by by a a feeling feeling murmur, murmur, that that this this great great discovery discovery was was no no doubt doubt true true of of mr. mr. micawber, micawber, and and that that it it did did him him much much credit. credit. 'i 'i will will not not conceal conceal from from you, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that i i have have long long felt felt the the brewing brewing business business to to be be particularly particularly adapted adapted to to mr. mr. micawber. micawber. look look at at barclay barclay and and perkins! perkins! look look at at truman, truman, hanbury, hanbury, and and buxton! buxton! it it is is on on that that extensive extensive footing footing that that mr. mr. micawber, micawber, i i know know from from my my own own knowledge knowledge of of him, him, is is calculated calculated to to shine; shine; and and the the profits, profits, i i am am told, told, are are e-nor-mous! e-nor-mous! but but if if mr. mr. micawber micawber cannot cannot get get into into those those firms firms -- -- which which decline decline to to answer answer his his letters, letters, when when he he offers offers his his services services even even in in an an inferior inferior capacity capacity -- -- what what is is the the use use of of dwelling dwelling upon upon that that idea? idea? none. none. i i may may have have a a conviction conviction that that mr. mr. micawber's micawber's manners manners -- -- ' ' 'hem! 'hem! really, really, my my dear,' dear,' interposed interposed mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'my 'my love, love, be be silent,' silent,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, laying laying her her brown brown glove glove on on his his hand. hand. 'i 'i may may have have a a conviction, conviction, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that mr. mr. micawber's micawber's manners manners peculiarly peculiarly qualify qualify him him for for the the banking banking business. business. i i may may argue argue within within myself, myself, that that if if i i had had a a deposit deposit at at a a banking-house, banking-house, the the manners manners of of mr. mr. micawber, micawber, as as representing representing that that banking-house, banking-house, would would inspire inspire confidence, confidence, and and must must extend extend the the connexion. connexion. but but if if the the various various banking-houses banking-houses refuse refuse to to avail avail themselves themselves of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities, abilities, or or receive receive the the offer offer of of them them with with contumely, contumely, what what is is the the use use of of dwelling dwelling upon upon that that idea? idea? none. none. as as to to originating originating a a banking-business, banking-business, i i may may know know that that there there are are members members of of my my family family who, who, if if they they chose chose to to place place their their money money in in mr. mr. micawber's micawber's hands, hands, might might found found an an establishment establishment of of that that description. description. but but if if they they do do not not choose choose to to place place their their money money in in mr. mr. micawber's micawber's hands hands -- -- which which they they don't don't -- -- what what is is the the use use of of that? that? again again i i contend contend that that we we are are no no farther farther advanced advanced than than we we were were before.' before.' i i shook shook my my head, head, and and said, said, 'not 'not a a bit.' bit.' traddles traddles also also shook shook his his head, head, and and said, said, 'not 'not a a bit.' bit.' 'what 'what do do i i deduce deduce from from this?' this?' mrs. mrs. micawber micawber went went on on to to say, say, still still with with the the same same air air of of putting putting a a case case lucidly. lucidly. 'what 'what is is the the conclusion, conclusion, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, to to which which i i am am irresistibly irresistibly brought? brought? am am i i wrong wrong in in saying, saying, it it is is clear clear that that we we must must live?' live?' i i answered answered 'not 'not at at all!' all!' and and traddles traddles answered answered 'not 'not at at all!' all!' and and i i found found myself myself afterwards afterwards sagely sagely adding, adding, alone, alone, that that a a person person must must either either live live or or die. die. 'just 'just so,' so,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'it 'it is is precisely precisely that. that. and and the the fact fact is, is, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that we we can can not not live live without without something something widely widely different different from from existing existing circumstances circumstances shortly shortly turning turning up. up. now now i i am am convinced, convinced, myself, myself, and and this this i i have have pointed pointed out out to to mr. mr. micawber micawber several several times times of of late, late, that that things things cannot cannot be be expected expected to to turn turn up up of of themselves. themselves. we we must, must, in in a a measure, measure, assist assist to to turn turn them them up. up. i i may may be be wrong, wrong, but but i i have have formed formed that that opinion.' opinion.' both both traddles traddles and and i i applauded applauded it it highly. highly. 'very 'very well,' well,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'then 'then what what do do i i recommend? recommend? here here is is mr. mr. micawber micawber with with a a variety variety of of qualifications qualifications -- -- with with great great talent talent -- -- ' ' 'really, 'really, my my love,' love,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'pray, 'pray, my my dear, dear, allow allow me me to to conclude. conclude. here here is is mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a variety variety of of qualifications, qualifications, with with great great talent talent -- -- i i should should say, say, with with genius, genius, but but that that may may be be the the partiality partiality of of a a wife wife -- -- ' ' traddles traddles and and i i both both murmured murmured 'no.' 'no.' 'and 'and here here is is mr. mr. micawber micawber without without any any suitable suitable position position or or employment. employment. where where does does that that responsibility responsibility rest? rest? clearly clearly on on society. society. then then i i would would make make a a fact fact so so disgraceful disgraceful known, known, and and boldly boldly challenge challenge society society to to set set it it right. right. it it appears appears to to me, me, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, forcibly, forcibly, 'that 'that what what mr. mr. micawber micawber has has to to do, do, is is to to throw throw down down the the gauntlet gauntlet to to society, society, and and say, say, in in effect, effect, "show "show me me who who will will take take that that up. up. let let the the party party immediately immediately step step forward."' forward."' i i ventured ventured to to ask ask mrs. mrs. micawber micawber how how this this was was to to be be done. done. 'by 'by advertising,' advertising,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber micawber -- -- 'in 'in all all the the papers. papers. it it appears appears to to me, me, that that what what mr. mr. micawber micawber has has to to do, do, in in justice justice to to himself, himself, in in justice justice to to his his family, family, and and i i will will even even go go so so far far as as to to say say in in justice justice to to society, society, by by which which he he has has been been hitherto hitherto overlooked, overlooked, is is to to advertise advertise in in all all the the papers; papers; to to describe describe himself himself plainly plainly as as so-and-so, so-and-so, with with such such and and such such qualifications qualifications and and to to put put it it thus: thus: "now "now employ employ me, me, on on remunerative remunerative terms, terms, and and address, address, post-paid, post-paid, to to w. w. m., m., post post office, office, camden camden town."' town."' 'this 'this idea idea of of mrs. mrs. micawber's, micawber's, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, making making his his shirt-collar shirt-collar meet meet in in front front of of his his chin, chin, and and glancing glancing at at me me sideways, sideways, 'is, 'is, in in fact, fact, the the leap leap to to which which i i alluded, alluded, when when i i last last had had the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing you.' 'advertising 'advertising is is rather rather expensive,' expensive,' i i remarked, remarked, dubiously. dubiously. 'exactly 'exactly so!' so!' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, preserving preserving the the same same logical logical air. air. 'quite 'quite true, true, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield! copperfield! i i have have made made the the identical identical observation observation to to mr. mr. micawber. micawber. it it is is for for that that reason reason especially, especially, that that i i think think mr. mr. micawber micawber ought ought (as (as i i have have already already said, said, in in justice justice to to himself, himself, in in justice justice to to his his family, family, and and in in justice justice to to society) society) to to raise raise a a certain certain sum sum of of money money -- -- on on a a bill.' bill.' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, leaning leaning back back in in his his chair, chair, trifled trifled with with his his eye-glass eye-glass and and cast cast his his eyes eyes up up at at the the ceiling; ceiling; but but i i thought thought him him observant observant of of traddles, traddles, too, too, who who was was looking looking at at the the fire. fire. 'if 'if no no member member of of my my family,' family,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'is 'is possessed possessed of of sufficient sufficient natural natural feeling feeling to to negotiate negotiate that that bill bill -- -- i i believe believe there there is is a a better better business-term business-term to to express express what what i i mean mean -- -- ' ' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with his his eyes eyes still still cast cast up up at at the the ceiling, ceiling, suggested suggested 'discount.' 'discount.' 'to 'to discount discount that that bill,' bill,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'then 'then my my opinion opinion is, is, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should go go into into the the city, city, should should take take that that bill bill into into the the money money market, market, and and should should dispose dispose of of it it for for what what he he can can get. get. if if the the individuals individuals in in the the money money market market oblige oblige mr. mr. micawber micawber to to sustain sustain a a great great sacrifice, sacrifice, that that is is between between themselves themselves and and their their consciences. consciences. i i view view it, it, steadily, steadily, as as an an investment. investment. i i recommend recommend mr. mr. micawber, micawber, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, to to do do the the same; same; to to regard regard it it as as an an investment investment which which is is sure sure of of return, return, and and to to make make up up his his mind mind to to any any sacrifice.' sacrifice.' i i felt, felt, but but i i am am sure sure i i don't don't know know why, why, that that this this was was self-denying self-denying and and devoted devoted in in mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and i i uttered uttered a a murmur murmur to to that that effect. effect. traddles, traddles, who who took took his his tone tone from from me, me, did did likewise, likewise, still still looking looking at at the the fire. fire. 'i 'i will will not,' not,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, finishing finishing her her punch, punch, and and gathering gathering her her scarf scarf about about her her shoulders, shoulders, preparatory preparatory to to her her withdrawal withdrawal to to my my bedroom: bedroom: 'i 'i will will not not protract protract these these remarks remarks on on the the subject subject of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's pecuniary pecuniary affairs. affairs. at at your your fireside, fireside, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and in in the the presence presence of of mr. mr. traddles, traddles, who, who, though though not not so so old old a a friend, friend, is is quite quite one one of of ourselves, ourselves, i i could could not not refrain refrain from from making making you acquainted acquainted with with the the course course i i advise advise mr. mr. micawber micawber to to take. take. i i feel feel that that the the time time is is arrived arrived when when mr. mr. micawber micawber should should exert exert himself himself and and -- -- i i will will add add -- -- assert assert himself, himself, and and it it appears appears to to me me that that these these are are the the means. means. i i am am aware aware that that i i am am merely merely a a female, female, and and that that a a masculine masculine judgement judgement is is usually usually considered considered more more competent competent to to the the discussion discussion of of such such questions; questions; still still i i must must not not forget forget that, that, when when i i lived lived at at home home with with my my papa papa and and mama, mama, my my papa papa was was in in the the habit habit of of saying, saying, "emma's "emma's form form is is fragile, fragile, but but her her grasp grasp of of a a subject subject is is inferior inferior to to none." none." that that my my papa papa was was too too partial, partial, i i well well know; know; but but that that he he was was an an observer observer of of character character in in some some degree, degree, my my duty duty and and my my reason reason equally equally forbid forbid me me to to doubt.' doubt.' with with these these words, words, and and resisting resisting our our entreaties entreaties that that she she would would grace grace the the remaining remaining circulation circulation of of the the punch punch with with her her presence, presence, mrs. mrs. micawber micawber retired retired to to my my bedroom. bedroom. and and really really i i felt felt that that she she was was a a noble noble woman woman -- -- the the sort sort of of woman woman who who might might have have been been a a roman roman matron, matron, and and done done all all manner manner of of heroic heroic things, things, in in times times of of public public trouble. trouble. in in the the fervour fervour of of this this impression, impression, i i congratulated congratulated mr. mr. micawber micawber on on the the treasure treasure he he possessed. possessed. so so did did traddles. traddles. mr. mr. micawber micawber extended extended his his hand hand to to each each of of us us in in succession, succession, and and then then covered covered his his face face with with his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, which which i i think think had had more more snuff snuff upon upon it it than than he he was was aware aware of. of. he he then then returned returned to to the the punch, punch, in in the the highest highest state state of of exhilaration. exhilaration. he he was was full full of of eloquence. eloquence. he he gave gave us us to to understand understand that that in in our our children children we we lived lived again, again, and and that, that, under under the the pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary difficulties, difficulties, any any accession accession to to their their number number was was doubly doubly welcome. welcome. he he said said that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had latterly latterly had had her her doubts doubts on on this this point, point, but but that that he he had had dispelled dispelled them, them, and and reassured reassured her. her. as as to to her her family, family, they they were were totally totally unworthy unworthy of of her, her, and and their their sentiments sentiments were were utterly utterly indifferent indifferent to to him, him, and and they they might might -- -- i i quote quote his his own own expression expression -- -- go go to to the the devil. devil. mr. mr. micawber micawber then then delivered delivered a a warm warm eulogy eulogy on on traddles. traddles. he he said said traddles's traddles's was was a a character, character, to to the the steady steady virtues virtues of of which which he he (mr. (mr. micawber) micawber) could could lay lay no no claim, claim, but but which, which, he he thanked thanked heaven, heaven, he he could could admire. admire. he he feelingly feelingly alluded alluded to to the the young young lady, lady, unknown, unknown, whom whom traddles traddles had had honoured honoured with with his his affection, affection, and and who who had had reciprocated reciprocated that that affection affection by by honouring honouring and and blessing blessing traddles traddles with with her her affection. affection. mr. mr. micawber micawber pledged pledged her. her. so so did did i. i. traddles traddles thanked thanked us us both, both, by by saying, saying, with with a a simplicity simplicity and and honesty honesty i i had had sense sense enough enough to to be be quite quite charmed charmed with, with, 'i 'i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you indeed. indeed. and and i i do do assure assure you, she's she's the the dearest dearest girl! girl! -- -- ' ' mr. mr. micawber micawber took took an an early early opportunity, opportunity, after after that, that, of of hinting, hinting, with with the the utmost utmost delicacy delicacy and and ceremony, ceremony, at at the the state state of of my my affections. affections. nothing nothing but but the the serious serious assurance assurance of of his his friend friend copperfield copperfield to to the the contrary, contrary, he he observed, observed, could could deprive deprive him him of of the the impression impression that that his his friend friend copperfield copperfield loved loved and and was was beloved. beloved. after after feeling feeling very very hot hot and and uncomfortable uncomfortable for for some some time, time, and and after after a a good good deal deal of of blushing, blushing, stammering, stammering, and and denying, denying, i i said, said, having having my my glass glass in in my my hand, hand, 'well! 'well! i i would would give give them them d.!' d.!' which which so so excited excited and and gratified gratified mr. mr. micawber, micawber, that that he he ran ran with with a a glass glass of of punch punch into into my my bedroom, bedroom, in in order order that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber might might drink drink d., d., who who drank drank it it with with enthusiasm, enthusiasm, crying crying from from within, within, in in a a shrill shrill voice, voice, 'hear, 'hear, hear! hear! my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i am am delighted. delighted. hear!' hear!' and and tapping tapping at at the the wall, wall, by by way way of of applause. applause. our our conversation, conversation, afterwards, afterwards, took took a a more more worldly worldly turn; turn; mr. mr. micawber micawber telling telling us us that that he he found found camden camden town town inconvenient, inconvenient, and and that that the the first first thing thing he he contemplated contemplated doing, doing, when when the the advertisement advertisement should should have have been been the the cause cause of of something something satisfactory satisfactory turning turning up, up, was was to to move. move. he he mentioned mentioned a a terrace terrace at at the the western western end end of of oxford oxford street, street, fronting fronting hyde hyde park, park, on on which which he he had had always always had had his his eye, eye, but but which which he he did did not not expect expect to to attain attain immediately, immediately, as as it it would would require require a a large large establishment. establishment. there there would would probably probably be be an an interval, interval, he he explained, explained, in in which which he he should should content content himself himself with with the the upper upper part part of of a a house, house, over over some some respectable respectable place place of of business business -- -- say say in in piccadilly, piccadilly, -- -- which which would would be be a a cheerful cheerful situation situation for for mrs. mrs. micawber; micawber; and and where, where, by by throwing throwing out out a a bow-window, bow-window, or or carrying carrying up up the the roof roof another another story, story, or or making making some some little little alteration alteration of of that that sort, sort, they they might might live, live, comfortably comfortably and and reputably, reputably, for for a a few few years. years. whatever whatever was was reserved reserved for for him, him, he he expressly expressly said, said, or or wherever wherever his his abode abode might might be, be, we we might might rely rely on on this this -- -- there there would would always always be be a a room room for for traddles, traddles, and and a a knife knife and and fork fork for for me. me. we we acknowledged acknowledged his his kindness; kindness; and and he he begged begged us us to to forgive forgive his his having having launched launched into into these these practical practical and and business-like business-like details, details, and and to to excuse excuse it it as as natural natural in in one one who who was was making making entirely entirely new new arrangements arrangements in in life. life. mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, tapping tapping at at the the wall wall again again to to know know if if tea tea were were ready, ready, broke broke up up this this particular particular phase phase of of our our friendly friendly conversation. conversation. she she made made tea tea for for us us in in a a most most agreeable agreeable manner; manner; and, and, whenever whenever i i went went near near her, her, in in handing handing about about the the tea-cups tea-cups and and bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter, asked asked me, me, in in a a whisper, whisper, whether whether d. d. was was fair, fair, or or dark, dark, or or whether whether she she was was short, short, or or tall: tall: or or something something of of that that kind; kind; which which i i think think i i liked. liked. after after tea, tea, we we discussed discussed a a variety variety of of topics topics before before the the fire; fire; and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was good good enough enough to to sing sing us us (in (in a a small, small, thin, thin, flat flat voice, voice, which which i i remembered remembered to to have have considered, considered, when when i i first first knew knew her, her, the the very very table-beer table-beer of of acoustics) acoustics) the the favourite favourite ballads ballads of of 'the 'the dashing dashing white white sergeant', sergeant', and and 'little 'little tafflin'. tafflin'. for for both both of of these these songs songs mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had been been famous famous when when she she lived lived at at home home with with her her papa papa and and mama. mama. mr. mr. micawber micawber told told us, us, that that when when he he heard heard her her sing sing the the first first one, one, on on the the first first occasion occasion of of his his seeing seeing her her beneath beneath the the parental parental roof, roof, she she had had attracted attracted his his attention attention in in an an extraordinary extraordinary degree; degree; but but that that when when it it came came to to little little tafflin, tafflin, he he had had resolved resolved to to win win that that woman woman or or perish perish in in the the attempt. attempt. it it was was between between ten ten and and eleven eleven o'clock o'clock when when mrs. mrs. micawber micawber rose rose to to replace replace her her cap cap in in the the whitey-brown whitey-brown paper paper parcel, parcel, and and to to put put on on her her bonnet. bonnet. mr. mr. micawber micawber took took the the opportunity opportunity of of traddles traddles putting putting on on his his great-coat, great-coat, to to slip slip a a letter letter into into my my hand, hand, with with a a whispered whispered request request that that i i would would read read it it at at my my leisure. leisure. i i also also took took the the opportunity opportunity of of my my holding holding a a candle candle over over the the banisters banisters to to light light them them down, down, when when mr. mr. micawber micawber was was going going first, first, leading leading mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and traddles traddles was was following following with with the the cap, cap, to to detain detain traddles traddles for for a a moment moment on on the the top top of of the the stairs. stairs. 'traddles,' 'traddles,' said said i, i, 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber don't don't mean mean any any harm, harm, poor poor fellow: fellow: but, but, if if i i were were you, i i wouldn't wouldn't lend lend him him anything.' anything.' 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned traddles, traddles, smiling, smiling, 'i 'i haven't haven't got got anything anything to to lend.' lend.' 'you have have got got a a name, name, you know,' know,' said said i. i. 'oh! 'oh! you call call that that something something to to lend?' lend?' returned returned traddles, traddles, with with a a thoughtful thoughtful look. look. 'certainly.' 'certainly.' 'oh!' 'oh!' said said traddles. traddles. 'yes, 'yes, to to be be sure! sure! i i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you, copperfield; copperfield; but but -- -- i i am am afraid afraid i i have have lent lent him him that that already.' already.' 'for 'for the the bill bill that that is is to to be be a a certain certain investment?' investment?' i i inquired. inquired. 'no,' 'no,' said said traddles. traddles. 'not 'not for for that that one. one. this this is is the the first first i i have have heard heard of of that that one. one. i i have have been been thinking thinking that that he he will will most most likely likely propose propose that that one, one, on on the the way way home. home. mine's mine's another.' another.' 'i 'i hope hope there there will will be be nothing nothing wrong wrong about about it,' it,' said said i. i. 'i 'i hope hope not,' not,' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i should should think think not, not, though, though, because because he he told told me, me, only only the the other other day, day, that that it it was was provided provided for. for. that that was was mr. mr. micawber's micawber's expression, expression, "provided "provided for."' for."' mr. mr. micawber micawber looking looking up up at at this this juncture juncture to to where where we we were were standing, standing, i i had had only only time time to to repeat repeat my my caution. caution. traddles traddles thanked thanked me, me, and and descended. descended. but but i i was was much much afraid, afraid, when when i i observed observed the the good-natured good-natured manner manner in in which which he he went went down down with with the the cap cap in in his his hand, hand, and and gave gave mrs. mrs. micawber micawber his his arm, arm, that that he he would would be be carried carried into into the the money money market market neck neck and and heels. heels. i i returned returned to to my my fireside, fireside, and and was was musing, musing, half half gravely gravely and and half half laughing, laughing, on on the the character character of of mr. mr. micawber micawber and and the the old old relations relations between between us, us, when when i i heard heard a a quick quick step step ascending ascending the the stairs. stairs. at at first, first, i i thought thought it it was was traddles traddles coming coming back back for for something something mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had left left behind; behind; but but as as the the step step approached, approached, i i knew knew it, it, and and felt felt my my heart heart beat beat high, high, and and the the blood blood rush rush to to my my face, face, for for it it was was steerforth's. steerforth's. i i was was never never unmindful unmindful of of agnes, agnes, and and she she never never left left that that sanctuary sanctuary in in my my thoughts thoughts -- -- if if i i may may call call it it so so -- -- where where i i had had placed placed her her from from the the first. first. but but when when he he entered, entered, and and stood stood before before me me with with his his hand hand out, out, the the darkness darkness that that had had fallen fallen on on him him changed changed to to light, light, and and i i felt felt confounded confounded and and ashamed ashamed of of having having doubted doubted one one i i loved loved so so heartily. heartily. i i loved loved her her none none the the less; less; i i thought thought of of her her as as the the same same benignant, benignant, gentle gentle angel angel in in my my life; life; i i reproached reproached myself, myself, not not her, her, with with having having done done him him an an injury; injury; and and i i would would have have made made him him any any atonement atonement if if i i had had known known what what to to make, make, and and how how to to make make it. it. 'why, 'why, daisy, daisy, old old boy, boy, dumb-foundered!' dumb-foundered!' laughed laughed steerforth, steerforth, shaking shaking my my hand hand heartily, heartily, and and throwing throwing it it gaily gaily away. away. 'have 'have i i detected detected you in in another another feast, feast, you sybarite! sybarite! these these doctors' doctors' commons commons fellows fellows are are the the gayest gayest men men in in town, town, i i believe, believe, and and beat beat us us sober sober oxford oxford people people all all to to nothing!' nothing!' his his bright bright glance glance went went merrily merrily round round the the room, room, as as he he took took the the seat seat on on the the sofa sofa opposite opposite to to me, me, which which mrs. mrs. micawber micawber had had recently recently vacated, vacated, and and stirred stirred the the fire fire into into a a blaze. blaze. 'i 'i was was so so surprised surprised at at first,' first,' said said i, i, giving giving him him welcome welcome with with all all the the cordiality cordiality i i felt, felt, 'that 'that i i had had hardly hardly breath breath to to greet greet you with, with, steerforth.' steerforth.' 'well, 'well, the the sight sight of of me me is is good good for for sore sore eyes, eyes, as as the the scotch scotch say,' say,' replied replied steerforth, steerforth, 'and 'and so so is is the the sight sight of of you, daisy, daisy, in in full full bloom. bloom. how how are are you, my my bacchanal?' bacchanal?' 'i 'i am am very very well,' well,' said said i; i; 'and 'and not not at at all all bacchanalian bacchanalian tonight, tonight, though though i i confess confess to to another another party party of of three.' three.' 'all 'all of of whom whom i i met met in in the the street, street, talking talking loud loud in in your your praise,' praise,' returned returned steerforth. steerforth. 'who's 'who's our our friend friend in in the the tights?' tights?' i i gave gave him him the the best best idea idea i i could, could, in in a a few few words, words, of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. he he laughed laughed heartily heartily at at my my feeble feeble portrait portrait of of that that gentleman, gentleman, and and said said he he was was a a man man to to know, know, and and he he must must know know him. him. 'but 'but who who do do you suppose suppose our our other other friend friend is?' is?' said said i, i, in in my my turn. turn. 'heaven 'heaven knows,' knows,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'not 'not a a bore, bore, i i hope? hope? i i thought thought he he looked looked a a little little like like one.' one.' 'traddles!' 'traddles!' i i replied, replied, triumphantly. triumphantly. 'who's 'who's he?' he?' asked asked steerforth, steerforth, in in his his careless careless way. way. 'don't 'don't you remember remember traddles? traddles? traddles traddles in in our our room room at at salem salem house?' house?' 'oh! 'oh! that that fellow!' fellow!' said said steerforth, steerforth, beating beating a a lump lump of of coal coal on on the the top top of of the the fire, fire, with with the the poker. poker. 'is 'is he he as as soft soft as as ever? ever? and and where where the the deuce deuce did did you pick pick him him up?' up?' i i extolled extolled traddles traddles in in reply, reply, as as highly highly as as i i could; could; for for i i felt felt that that steerforth steerforth rather rather slighted slighted him. him. steerforth, steerforth, dismissing dismissing the the subject subject with with a a light light nod, nod, and and a a smile, smile, and and the the remark remark that that he he would would be be glad glad to to see see the the old old fellow fellow too, too, for for he he had had always always been been an an odd odd fish, fish, inquired inquired if if i i could could give give him him anything anything to to eat? eat? during during most most of of this this short short dialogue, dialogue, when when he he had had not not been been speaking speaking in in a a wild wild vivacious vivacious manner, manner, he he had had sat sat idly idly beating beating on on the the lump lump of of coal coal with with the the poker. poker. i i observed observed that that he he did did the the same same thing thing while while i i was was getting getting out out the the remains remains of of the the pigeon-pie, pigeon-pie, and and so so forth. forth. 'why, 'why, daisy, daisy, here's here's a a supper supper for for a a king!' king!' he he exclaimed, exclaimed, starting starting out out of of his his silence silence with with a a burst, burst, and and taking taking his his seat seat at at the the table. table. 'i 'i shall shall do do it it justice, justice, for for i i have have come come from from yarmouth.' yarmouth.' 'i 'i thought thought you came came from from oxford?' oxford?' i i returned. returned. 'not 'not i,' i,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i have have been been seafaring seafaring -- -- better better employed.' employed.' 'littimer 'littimer was was here here today, today, to to inquire inquire for for you,' i i remarked, remarked, 'and 'and i i understood understood him him that that you were were at at oxford; oxford; though, though, now now i i think think of of it, it, he he certainly certainly did did not not say say so.' so.' 'littimer 'littimer is is a a greater greater fool fool than than i i thought thought him, him, to to have have been been inquiring inquiring for for me me at at all,' all,' said said steerforth, steerforth, jovially jovially pouring pouring out out a a glass glass of of wine, wine, and and drinking drinking to to me. me. 'as 'as to to understanding understanding him, him, you are are a a cleverer cleverer fellow fellow than than most most of of us, us, daisy, daisy, if if you can can do do that.' that.' 'that's 'that's true, true, indeed,' indeed,' said said i, i, moving moving my my chair chair to to the the table. table. 'so 'so you have have been been at at yarmouth, yarmouth, steerforth!' steerforth!' interested interested to to know know all all about about it. it. 'have 'have you been been there there long?' long?' 'no,' 'no,' he he returned. returned. 'an 'an escapade escapade of of a a week week or or so.' so.' 'and 'and how how are are they they all? all? of of course, course, little little emily emily is is not not married married yet?' yet?' 'not 'not yet. yet. going going to to be, be, i i believe believe -- -- in in so so many many weeks, weeks, or or months, months, or or something something or or other. other. i i have have not not seen seen much much of of 'em. 'em. by by the the by'; by'; he he laid laid down down his his knife knife and and fork, fork, which which he he had had been been using using with with great great diligence, diligence, and and began began feeling feeling in in his his pockets; pockets; 'i 'i have have a a letter letter for for you.' 'from 'from whom?' whom?' 'why, 'why, from from your your old old nurse,' nurse,' he he returned, returned, taking taking some some papers papers out out of of his his breast breast pocket. pocket. "'j. "'j. steerforth, steerforth, esquire, esquire, debtor, debtor, to to the the willing willing mind"; mind"; that's that's not not it. it. patience, patience, and and we'll we'll find find it it presently. presently. old old what's-his-name's what's-his-name's in in a a bad bad way, way, and and it's it's about about that, that, i i believe.' believe.' 'barkis, 'barkis, do do you mean?' mean?' 'yes!' 'yes!' still still feeling feeling in in his his pockets, pockets, and and looking looking over over their their contents: contents: 'it's 'it's all all over over with with poor poor barkis, barkis, i i am am afraid. afraid. i i saw saw a a little little apothecary apothecary there there -- -- surgeon, surgeon, or or whatever whatever he he is is -- -- who who brought brought your your worship worship into into the the world. world. he he was was mighty mighty learned learned about about the the case, case, to to me; me; but but the the upshot upshot of of his his opinion opinion was, was, that that the the carrier carrier was was making making his his last last journey journey rather rather fast. fast. -- -- -put -put your your hand hand into into the the breast breast pocket pocket of of my my great-coat great-coat on on the the chair chair yonder, yonder, and and i i think think you'll you'll find find the the letter. letter. is is it it there?' there?' 'here 'here it it is!' is!' said said i. i. 'that's 'that's right!' right!' it it was was from from peggotty; peggotty; something something less less legible legible than than usual, usual, and and brief. brief. it it informed informed me me of of her her husband's husband's hopeless hopeless state, state, and and hinted hinted at at his his being being 'a 'a little little nearer' nearer' than than heretofore, heretofore, and and consequently consequently more more difficult difficult to to manage manage for for his his own own comfort. comfort. it it said said nothing nothing of of her her weariness weariness and and watching, watching, and and praised praised him him highly. highly. it it was was written written with with a a plain, plain, unaffected, unaffected, homely homely piety piety that that i i knew knew to to be be genuine, genuine, and and ended ended with with 'my 'my duty duty to to my my ever ever darling' darling' -- -- meaning meaning myself. myself. while while i i deciphered deciphered it, it, steerforth steerforth continued continued to to eat eat and and drink. drink. 'it's 'it's a a bad bad job,' job,' he he said, said, when when i i had had done; done; 'but 'but the the sun sun sets sets every every day, day, and and people people die die every every minute, minute, and and we we mustn't mustn't be be scared scared by by the the common common lot. lot. if if we we failed failed to to hold hold our our own, own, because because that that equal equal foot foot at at all all men's men's doors doors was was heard heard knocking knocking somewhere, somewhere, every every object object in in this this world world would would slip slip from from us. us. no! no! ride ride on! on! rough-shod rough-shod if if need need be, be, smooth-shod smooth-shod if if that that will will do, do, but but ride ride on! on! ride ride on on over over all all obstacles, obstacles, and and win win the the race!' race!' 'and 'and win win what what race?' race?' said said i. i. 'the 'the race race that that one one has has started started in,' in,' said said he. he. 'ride 'ride on!' on!' i i noticed, noticed, i i remember, remember, as as he he paused, paused, looking looking at at me me with with his his handsome handsome head head a a little little thrown thrown back, back, and and his his glass glass raised raised in in his his hand, hand, that, that, though though the the freshness freshness of of the the sea-wind sea-wind was was on on his his face, face, and and it it was was ruddy, ruddy, there there were were traces traces in in it, it, made made since since i i last last saw saw it, it, as as if if he he had had applied applied himself himself to to some some habitual habitual strain strain of of the the fervent fervent energy energy which, which, when when roused, roused, was was so so passionately passionately roused roused within within him. him. i i had had it it in in my my thoughts thoughts to to remonstrate remonstrate with with him him upon upon his his desperate desperate way way of of pursuing pursuing any any fancy fancy that that he he took took -- -- such such as as this this buffeting buffeting of of rough rough seas, seas, and and braving braving of of hard hard weather, weather, for for example example -- -- when when my my mind mind glanced glanced off off to to the the immediate immediate subject subject of of our our conversation conversation again, again, and and pursued pursued that that instead. instead. 'i 'i tell tell you what, what, steerforth,' steerforth,' said said i, i, 'if 'if your your high high spirits spirits will will listen listen to to me me -- -- ' ' 'they 'they are are potent potent spirits, spirits, and and will will do do whatever whatever you like,' like,' he he answered, answered, moving moving from from the the table table to to the the fireside fireside again. again. 'then 'then i i tell tell you what, what, steerforth. steerforth. i i think think i i will will go go down down and and see see my my old old nurse. nurse. it it is is not not that that i i can can do do her her any any good, good, or or render render her her any any real real service; service; but but she she is is so so attached attached to to me me that that my my visit visit will will have have as as much much effect effect on on her, her, as as if if i i could could do do both. both. she she will will take take it it so so kindly kindly that that it it will will be be a a comfort comfort and and support support to to her. her. it it is is no no great great effort effort to to make, make, i i am am sure, sure, for for such such a a friend friend as as she she has has been been to to me. me. wouldn't wouldn't you go go a a day's day's journey, journey, if if you were were in in my my place?' place?' his his face face was was thoughtful, thoughtful, and and he he sat sat considering considering a a little little before before he he answered, answered, in in a a low low voice, voice, 'well! 'well! go. go. you can can do do no no harm.' harm.' 'you have have just just come come back,' back,' said said i, i, 'and 'and it it would would be be in in vain vain to to ask ask you to to go go with with me?' me?' 'quite,' 'quite,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i am am for for highgate highgate tonight. tonight. i i have have not not seen seen my my mother mother this this long long time, time, and and it it lies lies upon upon my my conscience, conscience, for for it's it's something something to to be be loved loved as as she she loves loves her her prodigal prodigal son. son. -- -- -bah! -bah! nonsense! nonsense! -- -- you mean mean to to go go tomorrow, tomorrow, i i suppose?' suppose?' he he said, said, holding holding me me out out at at arm's arm's length, length, with with a a hand hand on on each each of of my my shoulders. shoulders. 'yes, 'yes, i i think think so.' so.' 'well, 'well, then, then, don't don't go go till till next next day. day. i i wanted wanted you to to come come and and stay stay a a few few days days with with us. us. here here i i am, am, on on purpose purpose to to bid bid you, and and you fly fly off off to to yarmouth!' yarmouth!' 'you are are a a nice nice fellow fellow to to talk talk of of flying flying off, off, steerforth, steerforth, who who are are always always running running wild wild on on some some unknown unknown expedition expedition or or other!' other!' he he looked looked at at me me for for a a moment moment without without speaking, speaking, and and then then rejoined, rejoined, still still holding holding me me as as before, before, and and giving giving me me a a shake: shake: 'come! 'come! say say the the next next day, day, and and pass pass as as much much of of tomorrow tomorrow as as you can can with with us! us! who who knows knows when when we we may may meet meet again, again, else? else? come! come! say say the the next next day! day! i i want want you to to stand stand between between rosa rosa dartle dartle and and me, me, and and keep keep us us asunder.' asunder.' 'would 'would you love love each each other other too too much, much, without without me?' me?' 'yes; 'yes; or or hate,' hate,' laughed laughed steerforth; steerforth; 'no 'no matter matter which. which. come! come! say say the the next next day!' day!' i i said said the the next next day; day; and and he he put put on on his his great-coat great-coat and and lighted lighted his his cigar, cigar, and and set set off off to to walk walk home. home. finding finding him him in in this this intention, intention, i i put put on on my my own own great-coat great-coat (but (but did did not not light light my my own own cigar, cigar, having having had had enough enough of of that that for for one one while) while) and and walked walked with with him him as as far far as as the the open open road: road: a a dull dull road, road, then, then, at at night. night. he he was was in in great great spirits spirits all all the the way; way; and and when when we we parted, parted, and and i i looked looked after after him him going going so so gallantly gallantly and and airily airily homeward, homeward, i i thought thought of of his his saying, saying, 'ride 'ride on on over over all all obstacles, obstacles, and and win win the the race!' race!' and and wished, wished, for for the the first first time, time, that that he he had had some some worthy worthy race race to to run. run. i i was was undressing undressing in in my my own own room, room, when when mr. mr. micawber's micawber's letter letter tumbled tumbled on on the the floor. floor. thus thus reminded reminded of of it, it, i i broke broke the the seal seal and and read read as as follows. follows. it it was was dated dated an an hour hour and and a a half half before before dinner. dinner. i i am am not not sure sure whether whether i i have have mentioned mentioned that, that, when when mr. mr. micawber micawber was was at at any any particularly particularly desperate desperate crisis, crisis, he he used used a a sort sort of of legal legal phraseology, phraseology, which which he he seemed seemed to to think think equivalent equivalent to to winding winding up up his his affairs. affairs. 'sir 'sir -- -- for for i i dare dare not not say say my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, 'it 'it is is expedient expedient that that i i should should inform inform you that that the the undersigned undersigned is is crushed. crushed. some some flickering flickering efforts efforts to to spare spare you the the premature premature knowledge knowledge of of his his calamitous calamitous position, position, you may may observe observe in in him him this this day; day; but but hope hope has has sunk sunk beneath beneath the the horizon, horizon, and and the the undersigned undersigned is is crushed. crushed. 'the 'the present present communication communication is is penned penned within within the the personal personal range range (i (i cannot cannot call call it it the the society) society) of of an an individual, individual, in in a a state state closely closely bordering bordering on on intoxication, intoxication, employed employed by by a a broker. broker. that that individual individual is is in in legal legal possession possession of of the the premises, premises, under under a a distress distress for for rent. rent. his his inventory inventory includes, includes, not not only only the the chattels chattels and and effects effects of of every every description description belonging belonging to to the the undersigned, undersigned, as as yearly yearly tenant tenant of of this this habitation, habitation, but but also also those those appertaining appertaining to to mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, lodger, lodger, a a member member of of the the honourable honourable society society of of the the inner inner temple. temple. 'if 'if any any drop drop of of gloom gloom were were wanting wanting in in the the overflowing overflowing cup, cup, which which is is now now "commended" "commended" (in (in the the language language of of an an immortal immortal writer) writer) to to the the lips lips of of the the undersigned, undersigned, it it would would be be found found in in the the fact, fact, that that a a friendly friendly acceptance acceptance granted granted to to the the undersigned, undersigned, by by the the before-mentioned before-mentioned mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, for for the the sum sum of of 23l 23l 4s 4s 9 9 1/2d 1/2d is is over over due, due, and and is is not not provided provided for. for. also, also, in in the the fact fact that that the the living living responsibilities responsibilities clinging clinging to to the the undersigned undersigned will, will, in in the the course course of of nature, nature, be be increased increased by by the the sum sum of of one one more more helpless helpless victim; victim; whose whose miserable miserable appearance appearance may may be be looked looked for for -- -- in in round round numbers numbers -- -- at at the the expiration expiration of of a a period period not not exceeding exceeding six six lunar lunar months months from from the the present present date. date. 'after 'after premising premising thus thus much, much, it it would would be be a a work work of of supererogation supererogation to to add, add, that that dust dust and and ashes ashes are are for for ever ever scattered scattered 'on 'on 'the 'the 'head 'head 'of 'of 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber.' micawber.' poor poor traddles! traddles! i i knew knew enough enough of of mr. mr. micawber micawber by by this this time, time, to to foresee foresee that that he he might might be be expected expected to to recover recover the the blow; blow; but but my my night's night's rest rest was was sorely sorely distressed distressed by by thoughts thoughts of of traddles, traddles, and and of of the the curate's curate's daughter, daughter, who who was was one one of of ten, ten, down down in in devonshire, devonshire, and and who who was was such such a a dear dear girl, girl, and and who who would would wait wait for for traddles traddles (ominous (ominous praise!) praise!) until until she she was was sixty, sixty, or or any any age age that that could could be be mentioned. mentioned. chapter chapter 29. 29. i i visit visit steerforth steerforth at at his his home, home, again again i i mentioned mentioned to to mr. mr. spenlow spenlow in in the the morning, morning, that that i i wanted wanted leave leave of of absence absence for for a a short short time; time; and and as as i i was was not not in in the the receipt receipt of of any any salary, salary, and and consequently consequently was was not not obnoxious obnoxious to to the the implacable implacable jorkins, jorkins, there there was was no no difficulty difficulty about about it. it. i i took took that that opportunity, opportunity, with with my my voice voice sticking sticking in in my my throat, throat, and and my my sight sight failing failing as as i i uttered uttered the the words, words, to to express express my my hope hope that that miss miss spenlow spenlow was was quite quite well; well; to to which which mr. mr. spenlow spenlow replied, replied, with with no no more more emotion emotion than than if if he he had had been been speaking speaking of of an an ordinary ordinary human human being, being, that that he he was was much much obliged obliged to to me, me, and and she she was was very very well. well. we we articled articled clerks, clerks, as as germs germs of of the the patrician patrician order order of of proctors, proctors, were were treated treated with with so so much much consideration, consideration, that that i i was was almost almost my my own own master master at at all all times. times. as as i i did did not not care, care, however, however, to to get get to to highgate highgate before before one one or or two two o'clock o'clock in in the the day, day, and and as as we we had had another another little little excommunication excommunication case case in in court court that that morning, morning, which which was was called called the the office office of of the the judge judge promoted promoted by by tipkins tipkins against against bullock bullock for for his his soul's soul's correction, correction, i i passed passed an an hour hour or or two two in in attendance attendance on on it it with with mr. mr. spenlow spenlow very very agreeably. agreeably. it it arose arose out out of of a a scuffle scuffle between between two two churchwardens, churchwardens, one one of of whom whom was was alleged alleged to to have have pushed pushed the the other other against against a a pump; pump; the the handle handle of of which which pump pump projecting projecting into into a a school-house, school-house, which which school-house school-house was was under under a a gable gable of of the the church-roof, church-roof, made made the the push push an an ecclesiastical ecclesiastical offence. offence. it it was was an an amusing amusing case; case; and and sent sent me me up up to to highgate, highgate, on on the the box box of of the the stage-coach, stage-coach, thinking thinking about about the the commons, commons, and and what what mr. mr. spenlow spenlow had had said said about about touching touching the the commons commons and and bringing bringing down down the the country. country. mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was was pleased pleased to to see see me, me, and and so so was was rosa rosa dartle. dartle. i i was was agreeably agreeably surprised surprised to to find find that that littimer littimer was was not not there, there, and and that that we we were were attended attended by by a a modest modest little little parlour-maid, parlour-maid, with with blue blue ribbons ribbons in in her her cap, cap, whose whose eye eye it it was was much much more more pleasant, pleasant, and and much much less less disconcerting, disconcerting, to to catch catch by by accident, accident, than than the the eye eye of of that that respectable respectable man. man. but but what what i i particularly particularly observed, observed, before before i i had had been been half-an-hour half-an-hour in in the the house, house, was was the the close close and and attentive attentive watch watch miss miss dartle dartle kept kept upon upon me; me; and and the the lurking lurking manner manner in in which which she she seemed seemed to to compare compare my my face face with with steerforth's, steerforth's, and and steerforth's steerforth's with with mine, mine, and and to to lie lie in in wait wait for for something something to to come come out out between between the the two. two. so so surely surely as as i i looked looked towards towards her, her, did did i i see see that that eager eager visage, visage, with with its its gaunt gaunt black black eyes eyes and and searching searching brow, brow, intent intent on on mine; mine; or or passing passing suddenly suddenly from from mine mine to to steerforth's; steerforth's; or or comprehending comprehending both both of of us us at at once. once. in in this this lynx-like lynx-like scrutiny scrutiny she she was was so so far far from from faltering faltering when when she she saw saw i i observed observed it, it, that that at at such such a a time time she she only only fixed fixed her her piercing piercing look look upon upon me me with with a a more more intent intent expression expression still. still. blameless blameless as as i i was, was, and and knew knew that that i i was, was, in in reference reference to to any any wrong wrong she she could could possibly possibly suspect suspect me me of, of, i i shrunk shrunk before before her her strange strange eyes, eyes, quite quite unable unable to to endure endure their their hungry hungry lustre. lustre. all all day, day, she she seemed seemed to to pervade pervade the the whole whole house. house. if if i i talked talked to to steerforth steerforth in in his his room, room, i i heard heard her her dress dress rustle rustle in in the the little little gallery gallery outside. outside. when when he he and and i i engaged engaged in in some some of of our our old old exercises exercises on on the the lawn lawn behind behind the the house, house, i i saw saw her her face face pass pass from from window window to to window, window, like like a a wandering wandering light, light, until until it it fixed fixed itself itself in in one, one, and and watched watched us. us. when when we we all all four four went went out out walking walking in in the the afternoon, afternoon, she she closed closed her her thin thin hand hand on on my my arm arm like like a a spring, spring, to to keep keep me me back, back, while while steerforth steerforth and and his his mother mother went went on on out out of of hearing: hearing: and and then then spoke spoke to to me. me. 'you have have been been a a long long time,' time,' she she said, said, 'without 'without coming coming here. here. is is your your profession profession really really so so engaging engaging and and interesting interesting as as to to absorb absorb your your whole whole attention? attention? i i ask ask because because i i always always want want to to be be informed, informed, when when i i am am ignorant. ignorant. is is it it really, really, though?' though?' i i replied replied that that i i liked liked it it well well enough, enough, but but that that i i certainly certainly could could not not claim claim so so much much for for it. it. 'oh! 'oh! i i am am glad glad to to know know that, that, because because i i always always like like to to be be put put right right when when i i am am wrong,' wrong,' said said rosa rosa dartle. dartle. 'you mean mean it it is is a a little little dry, dry, perhaps?' perhaps?' 'well,' 'well,' i i replied; replied; 'perhaps 'perhaps it it was was a a little little dry.' dry.' 'oh! 'oh! and and that's that's a a reason reason why why you want want relief relief and and change change -- -- excitement excitement and and all all that?' that?' said said she. she. 'ah! 'ah! very very true! true! but but isn't isn't it it a a little little -- -- eh? eh? -- -- for for him; him; i i don't don't mean mean you?' a a quick quick glance glance of of her her eye eye towards towards the the spot spot where where steerforth steerforth was was walking, walking, with with his his mother mother leaning leaning on on his his arm, arm, showed showed me me whom whom she she meant; meant; but but beyond beyond that, that, i i was was quite quite lost. lost. and and i i looked looked so, so, i i have have no no doubt. doubt. 'don't 'don't it it -- -- i i don't don't say say that that it it does, does, mind mind i i want want to to know know -- -- don't don't it it rather rather engross engross him? him? don't don't it it make make him, him, perhaps, perhaps, a a little little more more remiss remiss than than usual usual in in his his visits visits to to his his blindly-doting blindly-doting -- -- eh?' eh?' with with another another quick quick glance glance at at them, them, and and such such a a glance glance at at me me as as seemed seemed to to look look into into my my innermost innermost thoughts. thoughts. 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' i i returned, returned, 'pray 'pray do do not not think think -- -- ' ' 'i 'i don't!' don't!' she she said. said. 'oh 'oh dear dear me, me, don't don't suppose suppose that that i i think think anything! anything! i i am am not not suspicious. suspicious. i i only only ask ask a a question. question. i i don't don't state state any any opinion. opinion. i i want want to to found found an an opinion opinion on on what what you tell tell me. me. then, then, it's it's not not so? so? well! well! i i am am very very glad glad to to know know it.' it.' 'it 'it certainly certainly is is not not the the fact,' fact,' said said i, i, perplexed, perplexed, 'that 'that i i am am accountable accountable for for steerforth's steerforth's having having been been away away from from home home longer longer than than usual usual -- -- if if he he has has been: been: which which i i really really don't don't know know at at this this moment, moment, unless unless i i understand understand it it from from you. i i have have not not seen seen him him this this long long while, while, until until last last night.' night.' 'no?' 'no?' 'indeed, 'indeed, miss miss dartle, dartle, no!' no!' as as she she looked looked full full at at me, me, i i saw saw her her face face grow grow sharper sharper and and paler, paler, and and the the marks marks of of the the old old wound wound lengthen lengthen out out until until it it cut cut through through the the disfigured disfigured lip, lip, and and deep deep into into the the nether nether lip, lip, and and slanted slanted down down the the face. face. there there was was something something positively positively awful awful to to me me in in this, this, and and in in the the brightness brightness of of her her eyes, eyes, as as she she said, said, looking looking fixedly fixedly at at me: me: 'what 'what is is he he doing?' doing?' i i repeated repeated the the words, words, more more to to myself myself than than her, her, being being so so amazed. amazed. 'what 'what is is he he doing?' doing?' she she said, said, with with an an eagerness eagerness that that seemed seemed enough enough to to consume consume her her like like a a fire. fire. 'in 'in what what is is that that man man assisting assisting him, him, who who never never looks looks at at me me without without an an inscrutable inscrutable falsehood falsehood in in his his eyes? eyes? if if you are are honourable honourable and and faithful, faithful, i i don't don't ask ask you to to betray betray your your friend. friend. i i ask ask you only only to to tell tell me, me, is is it it anger, anger, is is it it hatred, hatred, is is it it pride, pride, is is it it restlessness, restlessness, is is it it some some wild wild fancy, fancy, is is it it love, love, what what is is it, it, that that is is leading leading him?' him?' 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' i i returned, returned, 'how 'how shall shall i i tell tell you, so so that that you will will believe believe me, me, that that i i know know of of nothing nothing in in steerforth steerforth different different from from what what there there was was when when i i first first came came here? here? i i can can think think of of nothing. nothing. i i firmly firmly believe believe there there is is nothing. nothing. i i hardly hardly understand understand even even what what you mean.' mean.' as as she she still still stood stood looking looking fixedly fixedly at at me, me, a a twitching twitching or or throbbing, throbbing, from from which which i i could could not not dissociate dissociate the the idea idea of of pain, pain, came came into into that that cruel cruel mark; mark; and and lifted lifted up up the the corner corner of of her her lip lip as as if if with with scorn, scorn, or or with with a a pity pity that that despised despised its its object. object. she she put put her her hand hand upon upon it it hurriedly hurriedly -- -- a a hand hand so so thin thin and and delicate, delicate, that that when when i i had had seen seen her her hold hold it it up up before before the the fire fire to to shade shade her her face, face, i i had had compared compared it it in in my my thoughts thoughts to to fine fine porcelain porcelain -- -- and and saying, saying, in in a a quick, quick, fierce, fierce, passionate passionate way, way, 'i 'i swear swear you to to secrecy secrecy about about this!' this!' said said not not a a word word more. more. mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was was particularly particularly happy happy in in her her son's son's society, society, and and steerforth steerforth was, was, on on this this occasion, occasion, particularly particularly attentive attentive and and respectful respectful to to her. her. it it was was very very interesting interesting to to me me to to see see them them together, together, not not only only on on account account of of their their mutual mutual affection, affection, but but because because of of the the strong strong personal personal resemblance resemblance between between them, them, and and the the manner manner in in which which what what was was haughty haughty or or impetuous impetuous in in him him was was softened softened by by age age and and sex, sex, in in her, her, to to a a gracious gracious dignity. dignity. i i thought, thought, more more than than once, once, that that it it was was well well no no serious serious cause cause of of division division had had ever ever come come between between them; them; or or two two such such natures natures -- -- i i ought ought rather rather to to express express it, it, two two such such shades shades of of the the same same nature nature -- -- might might have have been been harder harder to to reconcile reconcile than than the the two two extremest extremest opposites opposites in in creation. creation. the the idea idea did did not not originate originate in in my my own own discernment, discernment, i i am am bound bound to to confess, confess, but but in in a a speech speech of of rosa rosa dartle's. dartle's. she she said said at at dinner: dinner: 'oh, 'oh, but but do do tell tell me, me, though, though, somebody, somebody, because because i i have have been been thinking thinking about about it it all all day, day, and and i i want want to to know.' know.' 'you want want to to know know what, what, rosa?' rosa?' returned returned mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. 'pray, 'pray, pray, pray, rosa, rosa, do do not not be be mysterious.' mysterious.' 'mysterious!' 'mysterious!' she she cried. cried. 'oh! 'oh! really? really? do do you consider consider me me so?' so?' 'do 'do i i constantly constantly entreat entreat you,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, 'to 'to speak speak plainly, plainly, in in your your own own natural natural manner?' manner?' 'oh! 'oh! then then this this is is not not my my natural natural manner?' manner?' she she rejoined. rejoined. 'now 'now you must must really really bear bear with with me, me, because because i i ask ask for for information. information. we we never never know know ourselves.' ourselves.' 'it 'it has has become become a a second second nature,' nature,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, without without any any displeasure; displeasure; 'but 'but i i remember, remember, -- -- and and so so must must you, i i think, think, -- -- when when your your manner manner was was different, different, rosa; rosa; when when it it was was not not so so guarded, guarded, and and was was more more trustful.' trustful.' 'i 'i am am sure sure you are are right,' right,' she she returned; returned; 'and 'and so so it it is is that that bad bad habits habits grow grow upon upon one! one! really? really? less less guarded guarded and and more more trustful? trustful? how how can can i, i, imperceptibly, imperceptibly, have have changed, changed, i i wonder! wonder! well, well, that's that's very very odd! odd! i i must must study study to to regain regain my my former former self.' self.' 'i 'i wish wish you would,' would,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, with with a a smile. smile. 'oh! 'oh! i i really really will, will, you know!' know!' she she answered. answered. 'i 'i will will learn learn frankness frankness from from -- -- let let me me see see -- -- from from james.' james.' 'you cannot cannot learn learn frankness, frankness, rosa,' rosa,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth quickly quickly -- -- for for there there was was always always some some effect effect of of sarcasm sarcasm in in what what rosa rosa dartle dartle said, said, though though it it was was said, said, as as this this was, was, in in the the most most unconscious unconscious manner manner in in the the world world -- -- 'in 'in a a better better school.' school.' 'that 'that i i am am sure sure of,' of,' she she answered, answered, with with uncommon uncommon fervour. fervour. 'if 'if i i am am sure sure of of anything, anything, of of course, course, you know, know, i i am am sure sure of of that.' that.' mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth appeared appeared to to me me to to regret regret having having been been a a little little nettled; nettled; for for she she presently presently said, said, in in a a kind kind tone: tone: 'well, 'well, my my dear dear rosa, rosa, we we have have not not heard heard what what it it is is that that you want want to to be be satisfied satisfied about?' about?' 'that 'that i i want want to to be be satisfied satisfied about?' about?' she she replied, replied, with with provoking provoking coldness. coldness. 'oh! 'oh! it it was was only only whether whether people, people, who who are are like like each each other other in in their their moral moral constitution constitution -- -- is is that that the the phrase?' phrase?' 'it's 'it's as as good good a a phrase phrase as as another,' another,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'thank 'thank you: -- -- whether whether people, people, who who are are like like each each other other in in their their moral moral constitution, constitution, are are in in greater greater danger danger than than people people not not so so circumstanced, circumstanced, supposing supposing any any serious serious cause cause of of variance variance to to arise arise between between them, them, of of being being divided divided angrily angrily and and deeply?' deeply?' 'i 'i should should say say yes,' yes,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'should 'should you?' she she retorted. retorted. 'dear 'dear me! me! supposing supposing then, then, for for instance instance -- -- any any unlikely unlikely thing thing will will do do for for a a supposition supposition -- -- that that you and and your your mother mother were were to to have have a a serious serious quarrel.' quarrel.' 'my 'my dear dear rosa,' rosa,' interposed interposed mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, laughing laughing good-naturedly, good-naturedly, 'suggest 'suggest some some other other supposition! supposition! james james and and i i know know our our duty duty to to each each other other better, better, i i pray pray heaven!' heaven!' 'oh!' 'oh!' said said miss miss dartle, dartle, nodding nodding her her head head thoughtfully. thoughtfully. 'to 'to be be sure. sure. that that would would prevent prevent it? it? why, why, of of course course it it would. would. exactly. exactly. now, now, i i am am glad glad i i have have been been so so foolish foolish as as to to put put the the case, case, for for it it is is so so very very good good to to know know that that your your duty duty to to each each other other would would prevent prevent it! it! thank thank you very very much.' much.' one one other other little little circumstance circumstance connected connected with with miss miss dartle dartle i i must must not not omit; omit; for for i i had had reason reason to to remember remember it it thereafter, thereafter, when when all all the the irremediable irremediable past past was was rendered rendered plain. plain. during during the the whole whole of of this this day, day, but but especially especially from from this this period period of of it, it, steerforth steerforth exerted exerted himself himself with with his his utmost utmost skill, skill, and and that that was was with with his his utmost utmost ease, ease, to to charm charm this this singular singular creature creature into into a a pleasant pleasant and and pleased pleased companion. companion. that that he he should should succeed, succeed, was was no no matter matter of of surprise surprise to to me. me. that that she she should should struggle struggle against against the the fascinating fascinating influence influence of of his his delightful delightful art art -- -- delightful delightful nature nature i i thought thought it it then then -- -- did did not not surprise surprise me me either; either; for for i i knew knew that that she she was was sometimes sometimes jaundiced jaundiced and and perverse. perverse. i i saw saw her her features features and and her her manner manner slowly slowly change; change; i i saw saw her her look look at at him him with with growing growing admiration; admiration; i i saw saw her her try, try, more more and and more more faintly, faintly, but but always always angrily, angrily, as as if if she she condemned condemned a a weakness weakness in in herself, herself, to to resist resist the the captivating captivating power power that that he he possessed; possessed; and and finally, finally, i i saw saw her her sharp sharp glance glance soften, soften, and and her her smile smile become become quite quite gentle, gentle, and and i i ceased ceased to to be be afraid afraid of of her her as as i i had had really really been been all all day, day, and and we we all all sat sat about about the the fire, fire, talking talking and and laughing laughing together, together, with with as as little little reserve reserve as as if if we we had had been been children. children. whether whether it it was was because because we we had had sat sat there there so so long, long, or or because because steerforth steerforth was was resolved resolved not not to to lose lose the the advantage advantage he he had had gained, gained, i i do do not not know; know; but but we we did did not not remain remain in in the the dining-room dining-room more more than than five five minutes minutes after after her her departure. departure. 'she 'she is is playing playing her her harp,' harp,' said said steerforth, steerforth, softly, softly, at at the the drawing-room drawing-room door, door, 'and 'and nobody nobody but but my my mother mother has has heard heard her her do do that, that, i i believe, believe, these these three three years.' years.' he he said said it it with with a a curious curious smile, smile, which which was was gone gone directly; directly; and and we we went went into into the the room room and and found found her her alone. alone. 'don't 'don't get get up,' up,' said said steerforth steerforth (which (which she she had had already already done)' done)' my my dear dear rosa, rosa, don't! don't! be be kind kind for for once, once, and and sing sing us us an an irish irish song.' song.' 'what 'what do do you care care for for an an irish irish song?' song?' she she returned. returned. 'much!' 'much!' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'much 'much more more than than for for any any other. other. here here is is daisy, daisy, too, too, loves loves music music from from his his soul. soul. sing sing us us an an irish irish song, song, rosa! rosa! and and let let me me sit sit and and listen listen as as i i used used to to do.' do.' he he did did not not touch touch her, her, or or the the chair chair from from which which she she had had risen, risen, but but sat sat himself himself near near the the harp. harp. she she stood stood beside beside it it for for some some little little while, while, in in a a curious curious way, way, going going through through the the motion motion of of playing playing it it with with her her right right hand, hand, but but not not sounding sounding it. it. at at length length she she sat sat down, down, and and drew drew it it to to her her with with one one sudden sudden action, action, and and played played and and sang. sang. i i don't don't know know what what it it was, was, in in her her touch touch or or voice, voice, that that made made that that song song the the most most unearthly unearthly i i have have ever ever heard heard in in my my life, life, or or can can imagine. imagine. there there was was something something fearful fearful in in the the reality reality of of it. it. it it was was as as if if it it had had never never been been written, written, or or set set to to music, music, but but sprung sprung out out of of passion passion within within her; her; which which found found imperfect imperfect utterance utterance in in the the low low sounds sounds of of her her voice, voice, and and crouched crouched again again when when all all was was still. still. i i was was dumb dumb when when she she leaned leaned beside beside the the harp harp again, again, playing playing it, it, but but not not sounding sounding it, it, with with her her right right hand. hand. a a minute minute more, more, and and this this had had roused roused me me from from my my trance: trance: -- -- steerforth steerforth had had left left his his seat, seat, and and gone gone to to her, her, and and had had put put his his arm arm laughingly laughingly about about her, her, and and had had said, said, 'come, 'come, rosa, rosa, for for the the future future we we will will love love each each other other very very much!' much!' and and she she had had struck struck him, him, and and had had thrown thrown him him off off with with the the fury fury of of a a wild wild cat, cat, and and had had burst burst out out of of the the room. room. 'what 'what is is the the matter matter with with rosa?' rosa?' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, coming coming in. in. 'she 'she has has been been an an angel, angel, mother,' mother,' returned returned steerforth, steerforth, 'for 'for a a little little while; while; and and has has run run into into the the opposite opposite extreme, extreme, since, since, by by way way of of compensation.' compensation.' 'you should should be be careful careful not not to to irritate irritate her, her, james. james. her her temper temper has has been been soured, soured, remember, remember, and and ought ought not not to to be be tried.' tried.' rosa rosa did did not not come come back; back; and and no no other other mention mention was was made made of of her, her, until until i i went went with with steerforth steerforth into into his his room room to to say say good good night. night. then then he he laughed laughed about about her, her, and and asked asked me me if if i i had had ever ever seen seen such such a a fierce fierce little little piece piece of of incomprehensibility. incomprehensibility. i i expressed expressed as as much much of of my my astonishment astonishment as as was was then then capable capable of of expression, expression, and and asked asked if if he he could could guess guess what what it it was was that that she she had had taken taken so so much much amiss, amiss, so so suddenly. suddenly. 'oh, 'oh, heaven heaven knows,' knows,' said said steerforth. steerforth. 'anything 'anything you like like -- -- or or nothing! nothing! i i told told you she she took took everything, everything, herself herself included, included, to to a a grindstone, grindstone, and and sharpened sharpened it. it. she she is is an an edge-tool, edge-tool, and and requires requires great great care care in in dealing dealing with. with. she she is is always always dangerous. dangerous. good good night!' night!' 'good 'good night!' night!' said said i, i, 'my 'my dear dear steerforth! steerforth! i i shall shall be be gone gone before before you wake wake in in the the morning. morning. good good night!' night!' he he was was unwilling unwilling to to let let me me go; go; and and stood, stood, holding holding me me out, out, with with a a hand hand on on each each of of my my shoulders, shoulders, as as he he had had done done in in my my own own room. room. 'daisy,' 'daisy,' he he said, said, with with a a smile smile -- -- 'for 'for though though that's that's not not the the name name your your godfathers godfathers and and godmothers godmothers gave gave you, it's it's the the name name i i like like best best to to call call you by by -- -- and and i i wish, wish, i i wish, wish, i i wish, wish, you could could give give it it to to me!' me!' 'why 'why so so i i can, can, if if i i choose,' choose,' said said i. i. 'daisy, 'daisy, if if anything anything should should ever ever separate separate us, us, you must must think think of of me me at at my my best, best, old old boy. boy. come! come! let let us us make make that that bargain. bargain. think think of of me me at at my my best, best, if if circumstances circumstances should should ever ever part part us!' us!' 'you have have no no best best to to me, me, steerforth,' steerforth,' said said i, i, 'and 'and no no worst. worst. you are are always always equally equally loved, loved, and and cherished cherished in in my my heart.' heart.' so so much much compunction compunction for for having having ever ever wronged wronged him, him, even even by by a a shapeless shapeless thought, thought, did did i i feel feel within within me, me, that that the the confession confession of of having having done done so so was was rising rising to to my my lips. lips. but but for for the the reluctance reluctance i i had had to to betray betray the the confidence confidence of of agnes, agnes, but but for for my my uncertainty uncertainty how how to to approach approach the the subject subject with with no no risk risk of of doing doing so, so, it it would would have have reached reached them them before before he he said, said, 'god 'god bless bless you, daisy, daisy, and and good good night!' night!' in in my my doubt, doubt, it it did did not not reach reach them; them; and and we we shook shook hands, hands, and and we we parted. parted. i i was was up up with with the the dull dull dawn, dawn, and, and, having having dressed dressed as as quietly quietly as as i i could, could, looked looked into into his his room. room. he he was was fast fast asleep; asleep; lying, lying, easily, easily, with with his his head head upon upon his his arm, arm, as as i i had had often often seen seen him him lie lie at at school. school. the the time time came came in in its its season, season, and and that that was was very very soon, soon, when when i i almost almost wondered wondered that that nothing nothing troubled troubled his his repose, repose, as as i i looked looked at at him. him. but but he he slept slept -- -- let let me me think think of of him him so so again again -- -- as as i i had had often often seen seen him him sleep sleep at at school; school; and and thus, thus, in in this this silent silent hour, hour, i i left left him. him. -- -- never never more, more, oh oh god god forgive forgive you, steerforth! steerforth! to to touch touch that that passive passive hand hand in in love love and and friendship. friendship. never, never, never never more! more! chapter chapter 30. 30. a a loss loss i i got got down down to to yarmouth yarmouth in in the the evening, evening, and and went went to to the the inn. inn. i i knew knew that that peggotty's peggotty's spare spare room room -- -- my my room room -- -- was was likely likely to to have have occupation occupation enough enough in in a a little little while, while, if if that that great great visitor, visitor, before before whose whose presence presence all all the the living living must must give give place, place, were were not not already already in in the the house; house; so so i i betook betook myself myself to to the the inn, inn, and and dined dined there, there, and and engaged engaged my my bed. bed. it it was was ten ten o'clock o'clock when when i i went went out. out. many many of of the the shops shops were were shut, shut, and and the the town town was was dull. dull. when when i i came came to to omer omer and and joram's, joram's, i i found found the the shutters shutters up, up, but but the the shop shop door door standing standing open. open. as as i i could could obtain obtain a a perspective perspective view view of of mr. mr. omer omer inside, inside, smoking smoking his his pipe pipe by by the the parlour parlour door, door, i i entered, entered, and and asked asked him him how how he he was. was. 'why, 'why, bless bless my my life life and and soul!' soul!' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'how 'how do do you find find yourself? yourself? take take a a seat. seat. -- -- -smoke -smoke not not disagreeable, disagreeable, i i hope?' hope?' 'by 'by no no means,' means,' said said i. i. 'i 'i like like it it -- -- in in somebody somebody else's else's pipe.' pipe.' 'what, 'what, not not in in your your own, own, eh?' eh?' mr. mr. omer omer returned, returned, laughing. laughing. 'all 'all the the better, better, sir. sir. bad bad habit habit for for a a young young man. man. take take a a seat. seat. i i smoke, smoke, myself, myself, for for the the asthma.' asthma.' mr. mr. omer omer had had made made room room for for me, me, and and placed placed a a chair. chair. he he now now sat sat down down again again very very much much out out of of breath, breath, gasping gasping at at his his pipe pipe as as if if it it contained contained a a supply supply of of that that necessary, necessary, without without which which he he must must perish. perish. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to have have heard heard bad bad news news of of mr. mr. barkis,' barkis,' said said i. i. mr. mr. omer omer looked looked at at me, me, with with a a steady steady countenance, countenance, and and shook shook his his head. head. 'do 'do you know know how how he he is is tonight?' tonight?' i i asked. asked. 'the 'the very very question question i i should should have have put put to to you, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. omer, omer, 'but 'but on on account account of of delicacy. delicacy. it's it's one one of of the the drawbacks drawbacks of of our our line line of of business. business. when when a a party's party's ill, ill, we we can't can't ask ask how how the the party party is.' is.' the the difficulty difficulty had had not not occurred occurred to to me; me; though though i i had had had had my my apprehensions apprehensions too, too, when when i i went went in, in, of of hearing hearing the the old old tune. tune. on on its its being being mentioned, mentioned, i i recognized recognized it, it, however, however, and and said said as as much. much. 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, you understand,' understand,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, nodding nodding his his head. head. 'we 'we dursn't dursn't do do it. it. bless bless you, it it would would be be a a shock shock that that the the generality generality of of parties parties mightn't mightn't recover, recover, to to say say "omer "omer and and joram's joram's compliments, compliments, and and how how do do you find find yourself yourself this this morning?" morning?" -- -- or or this this afternoon afternoon -- -- as as it it may may be.' be.' mr. mr. omer omer and and i i nodded nodded at at each each other, other, and and mr. mr. omer omer recruited recruited his his wind wind by by the the aid aid of of his his pipe. pipe. 'it's 'it's one one of of the the things things that that cut cut the the trade trade off off from from attentions attentions they they could could often often wish wish to to show,' show,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'take 'take myself. myself. if if i i have have known known barkis barkis a a year, year, to to move move to to as as he he went went by, by, i i have have known known him him forty forty years. years. but but i i can't can't go go and and say, say, "how "how is is he?"' he?"' i i felt felt it it was was rather rather hard hard on on mr. mr. omer, omer, and and i i told told him him so. so. 'i'm 'i'm not not more more self-interested, self-interested, i i hope, hope, than than another another man,' man,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'look 'look at at me! me! my my wind wind may may fail fail me me at at any any moment, moment, and and it it ain't ain't likely likely that, that, to to my my own own knowledge, knowledge, i'd i'd be be self-interested self-interested under under such such circumstances. circumstances. i i say say it it ain't ain't likely, likely, in in a a man man who who knows knows his his wind wind will will go, go, when when it it does does go, go, as as if if a a pair pair of of bellows bellows was was cut cut open; open; and and that that man man a a grandfather,' grandfather,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. i i said, said, 'not 'not at at all.' all.' 'it 'it ain't ain't that that i i complain complain of of my my line line of of business,' business,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'it 'it ain't ain't that. that. some some good good and and some some bad bad goes, goes, no no doubt, doubt, to to all all callings. callings. what what i i wish wish is, is, that that parties parties was was brought brought up up stronger-minded.' stronger-minded.' mr. mr. omer, omer, with with a a very very complacent complacent and and amiable amiable face, face, took took several several puffs puffs in in silence; silence; and and then then said, said, resuming resuming his his first first point: point: 'accordingly 'accordingly we're we're obleeged, obleeged, in in ascertaining ascertaining how how barkis barkis goes goes on, on, to to limit limit ourselves ourselves to to em'ly. em'ly. she she knows knows what what our our real real objects objects are, are, and and she she don't don't have have any any more more alarms alarms or or suspicions suspicions about about us, us, than than if if we we was was so so many many lambs. lambs. minnie minnie and and joram joram have have just just stepped stepped down down to to the the house, house, in in fact fact (she's (she's there, there, after after hours, hours, helping helping her her aunt aunt a a bit), bit), to to ask ask her her how how he he is is tonight; tonight; and and if if you was was to to please please to to wait wait till till they they come come back, back, they'd they'd give give you full full partic'lers. partic'lers. will will you take take something? something? a a glass glass of of srub srub and and water, water, now? now? i i smoke smoke on on srub srub and and water, water, myself,' myself,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, taking taking up up his his glass, glass, 'because 'because it's it's considered considered softening softening to to the the passages, passages, by by which which this this troublesome troublesome breath breath of of mine mine gets gets into into action. action. but, but, lord lord bless bless you,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, huskily, huskily, 'it 'it ain't ain't the the passages passages that's that's out out of of order! order! "give "give me me breath breath enough," enough," said said i i to to my my daughter daughter minnie, minnie, "and "and i'll i'll find find passages, passages, my my dear."' dear."' he he really really had had no no breath breath to to spare, spare, and and it it was was very very alarming alarming to to see see him him laugh. laugh. when when he he was was again again in in a a condition condition to to be be talked talked to, to, i i thanked thanked him him for for the the proffered proffered refreshment, refreshment, which which i i declined, declined, as as i i had had just just had had dinner; dinner; and, and, observing observing that that i i would would wait, wait, since since he he was was so so good good as as to to invite invite me, me, until until his his daughter daughter and and his his son-in-law son-in-law came came back, back, i i inquired inquired how how little little emily emily was? was? 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, removing removing his his pipe, pipe, that that he he might might rub rub his his chin: chin: 'i 'i tell tell you truly, truly, i i shall shall be be glad glad when when her her marriage marriage has has taken taken place.' place.' 'why 'why so?' so?' i i inquired. inquired. 'well, 'well, she's she's unsettled unsettled at at present,' present,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'it 'it ain't ain't that that she's she's not not as as pretty pretty as as ever, ever, for for she's she's prettier prettier -- -- i i do do assure assure you, she she is is prettier. prettier. it it ain't ain't that that she she don't don't work work as as well well as as ever, ever, for for she she does. does. she she was was worth worth any any six, six, and and she she is is worth worth any any six. six. but but somehow somehow she she wants wants heart. heart. if if you understand,' understand,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, after after rubbing rubbing his his chin chin again, again, and and smoking smoking a a little, little, 'what 'what i i mean mean in in a a general general way way by by the the expression, expression, "a "a long long pull, pull, and and a a strong strong pull, pull, and and a a pull pull altogether, altogether, my my hearties, hearties, hurrah!" hurrah!" i i should should say say to to you, that that that that was was -- -- in in a a general general way way -- -- what what i i miss miss in in em'ly.' em'ly.' mr. mr. omer's omer's face face and and manner manner went went for for so so much, much, that that i i could could conscientiously conscientiously nod nod my my head, head, as as divining divining his his meaning. meaning. my my quickness quickness of of apprehension apprehension seemed seemed to to please please him, him, and and he he went went on: on: 'now 'now i i consider consider this this is is principally principally on on account account of of her her being being in in an an unsettled unsettled state, state, you see. see. we we have have talked talked it it over over a a good good deal, deal, her her uncle uncle and and myself, myself, and and her her sweetheart sweetheart and and myself, myself, after after business; business; and and i i consider consider it it is is principally principally on on account account of of her her being being unsettled. unsettled. you must must always always recollect recollect of of em'ly,' em'ly,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, shaking shaking his his head head gently, gently, 'that 'that she's she's a a most most extraordinary extraordinary affectionate affectionate little little thing. thing. the the proverb proverb says, says, "you can't can't make make a a silk silk purse purse out out of of a a sow's sow's ear." ear." well, well, i i don't don't know know about about that. that. i i rather rather think think you may, may, if if you begin begin early early in in life. life. she she has has made made a a home home out out of of that that old old boat, boat, sir, sir, that that stone stone and and marble marble couldn't couldn't beat.' beat.' 'i 'i am am sure sure she she has!' has!' said said i. i. 'to 'to see see the the clinging clinging of of that that pretty pretty little little thing thing to to her her uncle,' uncle,' said said mr. mr. omer; omer; 'to 'to see see the the way way she she holds holds on on to to him, him, tighter tighter and and tighter, tighter, and and closer closer and and closer, closer, every every day, day, is is to to see see a a sight. sight. now, now, you know, know, there's there's a a struggle struggle going going on on when when that's that's the the case. case. why why should should it it be be made made a a longer longer one one than than is is needful?' needful?' i i listened listened attentively attentively to to the the good good old old fellow, fellow, and and acquiesced, acquiesced, with with all all my my heart, heart, in in what what he he said. said. 'therefore, 'therefore, i i mentioned mentioned to to them,' them,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, in in a a comfortable, comfortable, easy-going easy-going tone, tone, 'this. 'this. i i said, said, "now, "now, don't don't consider consider em'ly em'ly nailed nailed down down in in point point of of time, time, at at all. all. make make it it your your own own time. time. her her services services have have been been more more valuable valuable than than was was supposed; supposed; her her learning learning has has been been quicker quicker than than was was supposed; supposed; omer omer and and joram joram can can run run their their pen pen through through what what remains; remains; and and she's she's free free when when you wish. wish. if if she she likes likes to to make make any any little little arrangement, arrangement, afterwards, afterwards, in in the the way way of of doing doing any any little little thing thing for for us us at at home, home, very very well. well. if if she she don't, don't, very very well well still. still. we're we're no no losers, losers, anyhow." anyhow." for for -- -- don't don't you see,' see,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, touching touching me me with with his his pipe, pipe, 'it 'it ain't ain't likely likely that that a a man man so so short short of of breath breath as as myself, myself, and and a a grandfather grandfather too, too, would would go go and and strain strain points points with with a a little little bit bit of of a a blue-eyed blue-eyed blossom, blossom, like like her?' her?' 'not 'not at at all, all, i i am am certain,' certain,' said said i. i. 'not 'not at at all! all! you're you're right!' right!' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'well, 'well, sir, sir, her her cousin cousin -- -- you know know it's it's a a cousin cousin she's she's going going to to be be married married to?' to?' 'oh 'oh yes,' yes,' i i replied. replied. 'i 'i know know him him well.' well.' 'of 'of course course you do,' do,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'well, 'well, sir! sir! her her cousin cousin being, being, as as it it appears, appears, in in good good work, work, and and well well to to do, do, thanked thanked me me in in a a very very manly manly sort sort of of manner manner for for this this (conducting (conducting himself himself altogether, altogether, i i must must say, say, in in a a way way that that gives gives me me a a high high opinion opinion of of him), him), and and went went and and took took as as comfortable comfortable a a little little house house as as you or or i i could could wish wish to to clap clap eyes eyes on. on. that that little little house house is is now now furnished furnished right right through, through, as as neat neat and and complete complete as as a a doll's doll's parlour; parlour; and and but but for for barkis's barkis's illness illness having having taken taken this this bad bad turn, turn, poor poor fellow, fellow, they they would would have have been been man man and and wife wife -- -- i i dare dare say, say, by by this this time. time. as as it it is, is, there's there's a a postponement.' postponement.' 'and 'and emily, emily, mr. mr. omer?' omer?' i i inquired. inquired. 'has 'has she she become become more more settled?' settled?' 'why 'why that, that, you know,' know,' he he returned, returned, rubbing rubbing his his double double chin chin again, again, 'can't 'can't naturally naturally be be expected. expected. the the prospect prospect of of the the change change and and separation, separation, and and all all that, that, is, is, as as one one may may say, say, close close to to her her and and far far away away from from her, her, both both at at once. once. barkis's barkis's death death needn't needn't put put it it off off much, much, but but his his lingering lingering might. might. anyway, anyway, it's it's an an uncertain uncertain state state of of matters, matters, you see.' see.' 'i 'i see,' see,' said said i. i. 'consequently,' 'consequently,' pursued pursued mr. mr. omer, omer, 'em'ly's 'em'ly's still still a a little little down, down, and and a a little little fluttered; fluttered; perhaps, perhaps, upon upon the the whole, whole, she's she's more more so so than than she she was. was. every every day day she she seems seems to to get get fonder fonder and and fonder fonder of of her her uncle, uncle, and and more more loth loth to to part part from from all all of of us. us. a a kind kind word word from from me me brings brings the the tears tears into into her her eyes; eyes; and and if if you was was to to see see her her with with my my daughter daughter minnie's minnie's little little girl, girl, you'd you'd never never forget forget it. it. bless bless my my heart heart alive!' alive!' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, pondering, pondering, 'how 'how she she loves loves that that child!' child!' having having so so favourable favourable an an opportunity, opportunity, it it occurred occurred to to me me to to ask ask mr. mr. omer, omer, before before our our conversation conversation should should be be interrupted interrupted by by the the return return of of his his daughter daughter and and her her husband, husband, whether whether he he knew knew anything anything of of martha. martha. 'ah!' 'ah!' he he rejoined, rejoined, shaking shaking his his head, head, and and looking looking very very much much dejected. dejected. 'no 'no good. good. a a sad sad story, story, sir, sir, however however you come come to to know know it. it. i i never never thought thought there there was was harm harm in in the the girl. girl. i i wouldn't wouldn't wish wish to to mention mention it it before before my my daughter daughter minnie minnie -- -- for for she'd she'd take take me me up up directly directly -- -- but but i i never never did. did. none none of of us us ever ever did.' did.' mr. mr. omer, omer, hearing hearing his his daughter's daughter's footstep footstep before before i i heard heard it, it, touched touched me me with with his his pipe, pipe, and and shut shut up up one one eye, eye, as as a a caution. caution. she she and and her her husband husband came came in in immediately immediately afterwards. afterwards. their their report report was, was, that that mr. mr. barkis barkis was was 'as 'as bad bad as as bad bad could could be'; be'; that that he he was was quite quite unconscious; unconscious; and and that that mr. mr. chillip chillip had had mournfully mournfully said said in in the the kitchen, kitchen, on on going going away away just just now, now, that that the the college college of of physicians, physicians, the the college college of of surgeons, surgeons, and and apothecaries' apothecaries' hall, hall, if if they they were were all all called called in in together, together, couldn't couldn't help help him. him. he he was was past past both both colleges, colleges, mr. mr. chillip chillip said, said, and and the the hall hall could could only only poison poison him. him. hearing hearing this, this, and and learning learning that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was there, there, i i determined determined to to go go to to the the house house at at once. once. i i bade bade good good night night to to mr. mr. omer, omer, and and to to mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. joram; joram; and and directed directed my my steps steps thither, thither, with with a a solemn solemn feeling, feeling, which which made made mr. mr. barkis barkis quite quite a a new new and and different different creature. creature. my my low low tap tap at at the the door door was was answered answered by by mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. he he was was not not so so much much surprised surprised to to see see me me as as i i had had expected. expected. i i remarked remarked this this in in peggotty, peggotty, too, too, when when she she came came down; down; and and i i have have seen seen it it since; since; and and i i think, think, in in the the expectation expectation of of that that dread dread surprise, surprise, all all other other changes changes and and surprises surprises dwindle dwindle into into nothing. nothing. i i shook shook hands hands with with mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and passed passed into into the the kitchen, kitchen, while while he he softly softly closed closed the the door. door. little little emily emily was was sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, with with her her hands hands before before her her face. face. ham ham was was standing standing near near her. her. we we spoke spoke in in whispers; whispers; listening, listening, between between whiles, whiles, for for any any sound sound in in the the room room above. above. i i had had not not thought thought of of it it on on the the occasion occasion of of my my last last visit, visit, but but how how strange strange it it was was to to me, me, now, now, to to miss miss mr. mr. barkis barkis out out of of the the kitchen! kitchen! 'this 'this is is very very kind kind of of you, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'it's 'it's oncommon oncommon kind,' kind,' said said ham. ham. 'em'ly, 'em'ly, my my dear,' dear,' cried cried mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'see 'see here! here! here's here's mas'r mas'r davy davy come! come! what, what, cheer cheer up, up, pretty! pretty! not not a a wured wured to to mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' there there was was a a trembling trembling upon upon her, her, that that i i can can see see now. now. the the coldness coldness of of her her hand hand when when i i touched touched it, it, i i can can feel feel yet. yet. its its only only sign sign of of animation animation was was to to shrink shrink from from mine; mine; and and then then she she glided glided from from the the chair, chair, and and creeping creeping to to the the other other side side of of her her uncle, uncle, bowed bowed herself, herself, silently silently and and trembling trembling still, still, upon upon his his breast. breast. 'it's 'it's such such a a loving loving art,' art,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, smoothing smoothing her her rich rich hair hair with with his his great great hard hard hand, hand, 'that 'that it it can't can't abear abear the the sorrer sorrer of of this. this. it's it's nat'ral nat'ral in in young young folk, folk, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, when when they're they're new new to to these these here here trials, trials, and and timid, timid, like like my my little little bird, bird, -- -- it's it's nat'ral.' nat'ral.' she she clung clung the the closer closer to to him, him, but but neither neither lifted lifted up up her her face, face, nor nor spoke spoke a a word. word. 'it's 'it's getting getting late, late, my my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and here's here's ham ham come come fur fur to to take take you home. home. theer! theer! go go along along with with t'other t'other loving loving art! art! what' what' em'ly? em'ly? eh, eh, my my pretty?' pretty?' the the sound sound of of her her voice voice had had not not reached reached me, me, but but he he bent bent his his head head as as if if he he listened listened to to her, her, and and then then said: said: 'let 'let you stay stay with with your your uncle? uncle? why, why, you doen't doen't mean mean to to ask ask me me that! that! stay stay with with your your uncle, uncle, moppet? moppet? when when your your husband husband that'll that'll be be so so soon, soon, is is here here fur fur to to take take you home? home? now now a a person person wouldn't wouldn't think think it, it, fur fur to to see see this this little little thing thing alongside alongside a a rough-weather rough-weather chap chap like like me,' me,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, looking looking round round at at both both of of us, us, with with infinite infinite pride; pride; 'but 'but the the sea sea ain't ain't more more salt salt in in it it than than she she has has fondness fondness in in her her for for her her uncle uncle -- -- a a foolish foolish little little em'ly!' em'ly!' 'em'ly's 'em'ly's in in the the right right in in that, that, mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' said said ham. ham. 'lookee 'lookee here! here! as as em'ly em'ly wishes wishes of of it, it, and and as as she's she's hurried hurried and and frightened, frightened, like, like, besides, besides, i'll i'll leave leave her her till till morning. morning. let let me me stay stay too!' too!' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'you doen't doen't ought ought -- -- a a married married man man like like you -- -- or or what's what's as as good good -- -- to to take take and and hull hull away away a a day's day's work. work. and and you doen't doen't ought ought to to watch watch and and work work both. both. that that won't won't do. do. you go go home home and and turn turn in. in. you ain't ain't afeerd afeerd of of em'ly em'ly not not being being took took good good care care on, on, i i know.' know.' ham ham yielded yielded to to this this persuasion, persuasion, and and took took his his hat hat to to go. go. even even when when he he kissed kissed her her -- -- and and i i never never saw saw him him approach approach her, her, but but i i felt felt that that nature nature had had given given him him the the soul soul of of a a gentleman gentleman -- -- she she seemed seemed to to cling cling closer closer to to her her uncle, uncle, even even to to the the avoidance avoidance of of her her chosen chosen husband. husband. i i shut shut the the door door after after him, him, that that it it might might cause cause no no disturbance disturbance of of the the quiet quiet that that prevailed; prevailed; and and when when i i turned turned back, back, i i found found mr. mr. peggotty peggotty still still talking talking to to her. her. 'now, 'now, i'm i'm a a going going upstairs upstairs to to tell tell your your aunt aunt as as mas'r mas'r davy's davy's here, here, and and that'll that'll cheer cheer her her up up a a bit,' bit,' he he said. said. 'sit 'sit ye ye down down by by the the fire, fire, the the while, while, my my dear, dear, and and warm warm those those mortal mortal cold cold hands. hands. you doen't doen't need need to to be be so so fearsome, fearsome, and and take take on on so so much. much. what? what? you'll you'll go go along along with with me? me? -- -- well! well! come come along along with with me me -- -- come! come! if if her her uncle uncle was was turned turned out out of of house house and and home, home, and and forced forced to to lay lay down down in in a a dyke, dyke, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with no no less less pride pride than than before, before, 'it's 'it's my my belief belief she'd she'd go go along along with with him, him, now! now! but but there'll there'll be be someone someone else, else, soon, soon, -- -- someone someone else, else, soon, soon, em'ly!' em'ly!' afterwards, afterwards, when when i i went went upstairs, upstairs, as as i i passed passed the the door door of of my my little little chamber, chamber, which which was was dark, dark, i i had had an an indistinct indistinct impression impression of of her her being being within within it, it, cast cast down down upon upon the the floor. floor. but, but, whether whether it it was was really really she, she, or or whether whether it it was was a a confusion confusion of of the the shadows shadows in in the the room, room, i i don't don't know know now. now. i i had had leisure leisure to to think, think, before before the the kitchen kitchen fire, fire, of of pretty pretty little little emily's emily's dread dread of of death death -- -- which, which, added added to to what what mr. mr. omer omer had had told told me, me, i i took took to to be be the the cause cause of of her her being being so so unlike unlike herself herself -- -- and and i i had had leisure, leisure, before before peggotty peggotty came came down, down, even even to to think think more more leniently leniently of of the the weakness weakness of of it: it: as as i i sat sat counting counting the the ticking ticking of of the the clock, clock, and and deepening deepening my my sense sense of of the the solemn solemn hush hush around around me. me. peggotty peggotty took took me me in in her her arms, arms, and and blessed blessed and and thanked thanked me me over over and and over over again again for for being being such such a a comfort comfort to to her her (that (that was was what what she she said) said) in in her her distress. distress. she she then then entreated entreated me me to to come come upstairs, upstairs, sobbing sobbing that that mr. mr. barkis barkis had had always always liked liked me me and and admired admired me; me; that that he he had had often often talked talked of of me, me, before before he he fell fell into into a a stupor; stupor; and and that that she she believed, believed, in in case case of of his his coming coming to to himself himself again, again, he he would would brighten brighten up up at at sight sight of of me, me, if if he he could could brighten brighten up up at at any any earthly earthly thing. thing. the the probability probability of of his his ever ever doing doing so, so, appeared appeared to to me, me, when when i i saw saw him, him, to to be be very very small. small. he he was was lying lying with with his his head head and and shoulders shoulders out out of of bed, bed, in in an an uncomfortable uncomfortable attitude, attitude, half half resting resting on on the the box box which which had had cost cost him him so so much much pain pain and and trouble. trouble. i i learned, learned, that, that, when when he he was was past past creeping creeping out out of of bed bed to to open open it, it, and and past past assuring assuring himself himself of of its its safety safety by by means means of of the the divining divining rod rod i i had had seen seen him him use, use, he he had had required required to to have have it it placed placed on on the the chair chair at at the the bed-side, bed-side, where where he he had had ever ever since since embraced embraced it, it, night night and and day. day. his his arm arm lay lay on on it it now. now. time time and and the the world world were were slipping slipping from from beneath beneath him, him, but but the the box box was was there; there; and and the the last last words words he he had had uttered uttered were were (in (in an an explanatory explanatory tone) tone) 'old 'old clothes!' clothes!' 'barkis, 'barkis, my my dear!' dear!' said said peggotty, peggotty, almost almost cheerfully: cheerfully: bending bending over over him, him, while while her her brother brother and and i i stood stood at at the the bed's bed's foot. foot. 'here's 'here's my my dear dear boy boy -- -- my my dear dear boy, boy, master master davy, davy, who who brought brought us us together, together, barkis! barkis! that that you sent sent messages messages by, by, you know! know! won't won't you speak speak to to master master davy?' davy?' he he was was as as mute mute and and senseless senseless as as the the box, box, from from which which his his form form derived derived the the only only expression expression it it had. had. 'he's 'he's a a going going out out with with the the tide,' tide,' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to me, me, behind behind his his hand. hand. my my eyes eyes were were dim dim and and so so were were mr. mr. peggotty's; peggotty's; but but i i repeated repeated in in a a whisper, whisper, 'with 'with the the tide?' tide?' 'people 'people can't can't die, die, along along the the coast,' coast,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'except 'except when when the the tide's tide's pretty pretty nigh nigh out. out. they they can't can't be be born, born, unless unless it's it's pretty pretty nigh nigh in in -- -- not not properly properly born, born, till till flood. flood. he's he's a a going going out out with with the the tide. tide. it's it's ebb ebb at at half-arter half-arter three, three, slack slack water water half half an an hour. hour. if if he he lives lives till till it it turns, turns, he'll he'll hold hold his his own own till till past past the the flood, flood, and and go go out out with with the the next next tide.' tide.' we we remained remained there, there, watching watching him, him, a a long long time time -- -- hours. hours. what what mysterious mysterious influence influence my my presence presence had had upon upon him him in in that that state state of of his his senses, senses, i i shall shall not not pretend pretend to to say; say; but but when when he he at at last last began began to to wander wander feebly, feebly, it it is is certain certain he he was was muttering muttering about about driving driving me me to to school. school. 'he's 'he's coming coming to to himself,' himself,' said said peggotty. peggotty. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty touched touched me, me, and and whispered whispered with with much much awe awe and and reverence. reverence. 'they 'they are are both both a-going a-going out out fast.' fast.' 'barkis, 'barkis, my my dear!' dear!' said said peggotty. peggotty. 'c. 'c. p. p. barkis,' barkis,' he he cried cried faintly. faintly. 'no 'no better better woman woman anywhere!' anywhere!' 'look! 'look! here's here's master master davy!' davy!' said said peggotty. peggotty. for for he he now now opened opened his his eyes. eyes. i i was was on on the the point point of of asking asking him him if if he he knew knew me, me, when when he he tried tried to to stretch stretch out out his his arm, arm, and and said said to to me, me, distinctly, distinctly, with with a a pleasant pleasant smile: smile: 'barkis 'barkis is is willin'!' willin'!' and, and, it it being being low low water, water, he he went went out out with with the the tide. tide. chapter chapter 31. 31. a a greater greater loss loss it it was was not not difficult difficult for for me, me, on on peggotty's peggotty's solicitation, solicitation, to to resolve resolve to to stay stay where where i i was, was, until until after after the the remains remains of of the the poor poor carrier carrier should should have have made made their their last last journey journey to to blunderstone. blunderstone. she she had had long long ago ago bought, bought, out out of of her her own own savings, savings, a a little little piece piece of of ground ground in in our our old old churchyard churchyard near near the the grave grave of of 'her 'her sweet sweet girl', girl', as as she she always always called called my my mother; mother; and and there there they they were were to to rest. rest. in in keeping keeping peggotty peggotty company, company, and and doing doing all all i i could could for for her her (little (little enough enough at at the the utmost), utmost), i i was was as as grateful, grateful, i i rejoice rejoice to to think, think, as as even even now now i i could could wish wish myself myself to to have have been. been. but but i i am am afraid afraid i i had had a a supreme supreme satisfaction, satisfaction, of of a a personal personal and and professional professional nature, nature, in in taking taking charge charge of of mr. mr. barkis's barkis's will, will, and and expounding expounding its its contents. contents. i i may may claim claim the the merit merit of of having having originated originated the the suggestion suggestion that that the the will will should should be be looked looked for for in in the the box. box. after after some some search, search, it it was was found found in in the the box, box, at at the the bottom bottom of of a a horse's horse's nose-bag; nose-bag; wherein wherein (besides (besides hay) hay) there there was was discovered discovered an an old old gold gold watch, watch, with with chain chain and and seals, seals, which which mr. mr. barkis barkis had had worn worn on on his his wedding-day, wedding-day, and and which which had had never never been been seen seen before before or or since; since; a a silver silver tobacco-stopper, tobacco-stopper, in in the the form form of of a a leg; leg; an an imitation imitation lemon, lemon, full full of of minute minute cups cups and and saucers, saucers, which which i i have have some some idea idea mr. mr. barkis barkis must must have have purchased purchased to to present present to to me me when when i i was was a a child, child, and and afterwards afterwards found found himself himself unable unable to to part part with; with; eighty-seven eighty-seven guineas guineas and and a a half, half, in in guineas guineas and and half-guineas; half-guineas; two two hundred hundred and and ten ten pounds, pounds, in in perfectly perfectly clean clean bank bank notes; notes; certain certain receipts receipts for for bank bank of of england england stock; stock; an an old old horseshoe, horseshoe, a a bad bad shilling, shilling, a a piece piece of of camphor, camphor, and and an an oyster-shell. oyster-shell. from from the the circumstance circumstance of of the the latter latter article article having having been been much much polished, polished, and and displaying displaying prismatic prismatic colours colours on on the the inside, inside, i i conclude conclude that that mr. mr. barkis barkis had had some some general general ideas ideas about about pearls, pearls, which which never never resolved resolved themselves themselves into into anything anything definite. definite. for for years years and and years, years, mr. mr. barkis barkis had had carried carried this this box, box, on on all all his his journeys, journeys, every every day. day. that that it it might might the the better better escape escape notice, notice, he he had had invented invented a a fiction fiction that that it it belonged belonged to to 'mr. 'mr. blackboy', blackboy', and and was was 'to 'to be be left left with with barkis barkis till till called called for'; for'; a a fable fable he he had had elaborately elaborately written written on on the the lid, lid, in in characters characters now now scarcely scarcely legible. legible. he he had had hoarded, hoarded, all all these these years, years, i i found, found, to to good good purpose. purpose. his his property property in in money money amounted amounted to to nearly nearly three three thousand thousand pounds. pounds. of of this this he he bequeathed bequeathed the the interest interest of of one one thousand thousand to to mr. mr. peggotty peggotty for for his his life; life; on on his his decease, decease, the the principal principal to to be be equally equally divided divided between between peggotty, peggotty, little little emily, emily, and and me, me, or or the the survivor survivor or or survivors survivors of of us, us, share share and and share share alike. alike. all all the the rest rest he he died died possessed possessed of, of, he he bequeathed bequeathed to to peggotty; peggotty; whom whom he he left left residuary residuary legatee, legatee, and and sole sole executrix executrix of of that that his his last last will will and and testament. testament. i i felt felt myself myself quite quite a a proctor proctor when when i i read read this this document document aloud aloud with with all all possible possible ceremony, ceremony, and and set set forth forth its its provisions, provisions, any any number number of of times, times, to to those those whom whom they they concerned. concerned. i i began began to to think think there there was was more more in in the the commons commons than than i i had had supposed. supposed. i i examined examined the the will will with with the the deepest deepest attention, attention, pronounced pronounced it it perfectly perfectly formal formal in in all all respects, respects, made made a a pencil-mark pencil-mark or or so so in in the the margin, margin, and and thought thought it it rather rather extraordinary extraordinary that that i i knew knew so so much. much. in in this this abstruse abstruse pursuit; pursuit; in in making making an an account account for for peggotty, peggotty, of of all all the the property property into into which which she she had had come; come; in in arranging arranging all all the the affairs affairs in in an an orderly orderly manner; manner; and and in in being being her her referee referee and and adviser adviser on on every every point, point, to to our our joint joint delight; delight; i i passed passed the the week week before before the the funeral. funeral. i i did did not not see see little little emily emily in in that that interval, interval, but but they they told told me me she she was was to to be be quietly quietly married married in in a a fortnight. fortnight. i i did did not not attend attend the the funeral funeral in in character, character, if if i i may may venture venture to to say say so. so. i i mean mean i i was was not not dressed dressed up up in in a a black black coat coat and and a a streamer, streamer, to to frighten frighten the the birds; birds; but but i i walked walked over over to to blunderstone blunderstone early early in in the the morning, morning, and and was was in in the the churchyard churchyard when when it it came, came, attended attended only only by by peggotty peggotty and and her her brother. brother. the the mad mad gentleman gentleman looked looked on, on, out out of of my my little little window; window; mr. mr. chillip's chillip's baby baby wagged wagged its its heavy heavy head, head, and and rolled rolled its its goggle goggle eyes, eyes, at at the the clergyman, clergyman, over over its its nurse's nurse's shoulder; shoulder; mr. mr. omer omer breathed breathed short short in in the the background; background; no no one one else else was was there; there; and and it it was was very very quiet. quiet. we we walked walked about about the the churchyard churchyard for for an an hour, hour, after after all all was was over; over; and and pulled pulled some some young young leaves leaves from from the the tree tree above above my my mother's mother's grave. grave. a a dread dread falls falls on on me me here. here. a a cloud cloud is is lowering lowering on on the the distant distant town, town, towards towards which which i i retraced retraced my my solitary solitary steps. steps. i i fear fear to to approach approach it. it. i i cannot cannot bear bear to to think think of of what what did did come, come, upon upon that that memorable memorable night; night; of of what what must must come come again, again, if if i i go go on. on. it it is is no no worse, worse, because because i i write write of of it. it. it it would would be be no no better, better, if if i i stopped stopped my my most most unwilling unwilling hand. hand. it it is is done. done. nothing nothing can can undo undo it; it; nothing nothing can can make make it it otherwise otherwise than than as as it it was. was. my my old old nurse nurse was was to to go go to to london london with with me me next next day, day, on on the the business business of of the the will. will. little little emily emily was was passing passing that that day day at at mr. mr. omer's. omer's. we we were were all all to to meet meet in in the the old old boathouse boathouse that that night. night. ham ham would would bring bring emily emily at at the the usual usual hour. hour. i i would would walk walk back back at at my my leisure. leisure. the the brother brother and and sister sister would would return return as as they they had had come, come, and and be be expecting expecting us, us, when when the the day day closed closed in, in, at at the the fireside. fireside. i i parted parted from from them them at at the the wicket-gate, wicket-gate, where where visionary visionary strap strap had had rested rested with with roderick roderick random's random's knapsack knapsack in in the the days days of of yore; yore; and, and, instead instead of of going going straight straight back, back, walked walked a a little little distance distance on on the the road road to to lowestoft. lowestoft. then then i i turned, turned, and and walked walked back back towards towards yarmouth. yarmouth. i i stayed stayed to to dine dine at at a a decent decent alehouse, alehouse, some some mile mile or or two two from from the the ferry ferry i i have have mentioned mentioned before; before; and and thus thus the the day day wore wore away, away, and and it it was was evening evening when when i i reached reached it. it. rain rain was was falling falling heavily heavily by by that that time, time, and and it it was was a a wild wild night; night; but but there there was was a a moon moon behind behind the the clouds, clouds, and and it it was was not not dark. dark. i i was was soon soon within within sight sight of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's house, house, and and of of the the light light within within it it shining shining through through the the window. window. a a little little floundering floundering across across the the sand, sand, which which was was heavy, heavy, brought brought me me to to the the door, door, and and i i went went in. in. it it looked looked very very comfortable comfortable indeed. indeed. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty had had smoked smoked his his evening evening pipe pipe and and there there were were preparations preparations for for some some supper supper by by and and by. by. the the fire fire was was bright, bright, the the ashes ashes were were thrown thrown up, up, the the locker locker was was ready ready for for little little emily emily in in her her old old place. place. in in her her own own old old place place sat sat peggotty, peggotty, once once more, more, looking looking (but (but for for her her dress) dress) as as if if she she had had never never left left it. it. she she had had fallen fallen back, back, already, already, on on the the society society of of the the work-box work-box with with st. st. paul's paul's upon upon the the lid, lid, the the yard-measure yard-measure in in the the cottage, cottage, and and the the bit bit of of wax-candle; wax-candle; and and there there they they all all were, were, just just as as if if they they had had never never been been disturbed. disturbed. mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge appeared appeared to to be be fretting fretting a a little, little, in in her her old old corner; corner; and and consequently consequently looked looked quite quite natural, natural, too. too. 'you're 'you're first first of of the the lot, lot, mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty with with a a happy happy face. face. 'doen't 'doen't keep keep in in that that coat, coat, sir, sir, if if it's it's wet.' wet.' 'thank 'thank you, mr. mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' said said i, i, giving giving him him my my outer outer coat coat to to hang hang up. up. 'it's 'it's quite quite dry.' dry.' 'so 'so 'tis!' 'tis!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, feeling feeling my my shoulders. shoulders. 'as 'as a a chip! chip! sit sit ye ye down, down, sir. sir. it it ain't ain't o' o' no no use use saying saying welcome welcome to to you, but but you're you're welcome, welcome, kind kind and and hearty.' hearty.' 'thank 'thank you, mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, i i am am sure sure of of that. that. well, well, peggotty!' peggotty!' said said i, i, giving giving her her a a kiss. kiss. 'and 'and how how are are you, old old woman?' woman?' 'ha, 'ha, ha!' ha!' laughed laughed mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, sitting sitting down down beside beside us, us, and and rubbing rubbing his his hands hands in in his his sense sense of of relief relief from from recent recent trouble, trouble, and and in in the the genuine genuine heartiness heartiness of of his his nature; nature; 'there's 'there's not not a a woman woman in in the the wureld, wureld, sir sir -- -- as as i i tell tell her her -- -- that that need need to to feel feel more more easy easy in in her her mind mind than than her! her! she she done done her her dooty dooty by by the the departed, departed, and and the the departed departed know'd know'd it; it; and and the the departed departed done done what what was was right right by by her, her, as as she she done done what what was was right right by by the the departed; departed; -- -- and and -- -- and and -- -- and and it's it's all all right!' right!' mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge groaned. groaned. 'cheer 'cheer up, up, my my pritty pritty mawther!' mawther!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. (but (but he he shook shook his his head head aside aside at at us, us, evidently evidently sensible sensible of of the the tendency tendency of of the the late late occurrences occurrences to to recall recall the the memory memory of of the the old old one.) one.) 'doen't 'doen't be be down! down! cheer cheer up, up, for for your your own own self, self, on'y on'y a a little little bit, bit, and and see see if if a a good good deal deal more more doen't doen't come come nat'ral!' nat'ral!' 'not 'not to to me, me, dan'l,' dan'l,' returned returned mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'nothink's 'nothink's nat'ral nat'ral to to me me but but to to be be lone lone and and lorn.' lorn.' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, soothing soothing her her sorrows. sorrows. 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, dan'l!' dan'l!' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'i 'i ain't ain't a a person person to to live live with with them them as as has has had had money money left. left. thinks thinks go go too too contrary contrary with with me. me. i i had had better better be be a a riddance.' riddance.' 'why, 'why, how how should should i i ever ever spend spend it it without without you?' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with an an air air of of serious serious remonstrance. remonstrance. 'what 'what are are you a a talking talking on? on? doen't doen't i i want want you more more now, now, than than ever ever i i did?' did?' 'i 'i know'd know'd i i was was never never wanted wanted before!' before!' cried cried mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, with with a a pitiable pitiable whimper, whimper, 'and 'and now now i'm i'm told told so! so! how how could could i i expect expect to to be be wanted, wanted, being being so so lone lone and and lorn, lorn, and and so so contrary!' contrary!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty seemed seemed very very much much shocked shocked at at himself himself for for having having made made a a speech speech capable capable of of this this unfeeling unfeeling construction, construction, but but was was prevented prevented from from replying, replying, by by peggotty's peggotty's pulling pulling his his sleeve, sleeve, and and shaking shaking her her head. head. after after looking looking at at mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge for for some some moments, moments, in in sore sore distress distress of of mind, mind, he he glanced glanced at at the the dutch dutch clock, clock, rose, rose, snuffed snuffed the the candle, candle, and and put put it it in in the the window. window. 'theer!'said 'theer!'said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, cheerily.'theer cheerily.'theer we we are, are, missis missis gummidge!' gummidge!' mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge slightly slightly groaned. groaned. 'lighted 'lighted up, up, accordin' accordin' to to custom! custom! you're you're a a wonderin' wonderin' what what that's that's fur, fur, sir! sir! well, well, it's it's fur fur our our little little em'ly. em'ly. you see, see, the the path path ain't ain't over over light light or or cheerful cheerful arter arter dark; dark; and and when when i'm i'm here here at at the the hour hour as as she's she's a a comin' comin' home, home, i i puts puts the the light light in in the the winder. winder. that, that, you see,' see,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, bending bending over over me me with with great great glee, glee, 'meets 'meets two two objects. objects. she she says, says, says says em'ly, em'ly, "theer's "theer's home!" home!" she she says. says. and and likewise, likewise, says says em'ly, em'ly, "my "my uncle's uncle's theer!" theer!" fur fur if if i i ain't ain't theer, theer, i i never never have have no no light light showed.' showed.' 'you're 'you're a a baby!' baby!' said said peggotty; peggotty; very very fond fond of of him him for for it, it, if if she she thought thought so. so. 'well,' 'well,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, standing standing with with his his legs legs pretty pretty wide wide apart, apart, and and rubbing rubbing his his hands hands up up and and down down them them in in his his comfortable comfortable satisfaction, satisfaction, as as he he looked looked alternately alternately at at us us and and at at the the fire. fire. 'i 'i doen't doen't know know but but i i am. am. not, not, you see, see, to to look look at.' at.' 'not 'not azackly,' azackly,' observed observed peggotty. peggotty. 'no,' 'no,' laughed laughed mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'not 'not to to look look at, at, but but to to -- -- to to consider consider on, on, you know. know. i i doen't doen't care, care, bless bless you! now now i i tell tell you. when when i i go go a a looking looking and and looking looking about about that that theer theer pritty pritty house house of of our our em'ly's, em'ly's, i'm i'm -- -- i'm i'm gormed,' gormed,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with sudden sudden emphasis emphasis -- -- 'theer! 'theer! i i can't can't say say more more -- -- if if i i doen't doen't feel feel as as if if the the littlest littlest things things was was her, her, a'most. a'most. i i takes takes 'em 'em up up and and i i put put 'em 'em down, down, and and i i touches touches of of 'em 'em as as delicate delicate as as if if they they was was our our em'ly. em'ly. so so 'tis 'tis with with her her little little bonnets bonnets and and that. that. i i couldn't couldn't see see one one on on 'em 'em rough rough used used a a purpose purpose -- -- not not fur fur the the whole whole wureld. wureld. there's there's a a babby babby fur fur you, in in the the form form of of a a great great sea sea porkypine!' porkypine!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, relieving relieving his his earnestness earnestness with with a a roar roar of of laughter. laughter. peggotty peggotty and and i i both both laughed, laughed, but but not not so so loud. loud. 'it's 'it's my my opinion, opinion, you see,' see,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a delighted delighted face, face, after after some some further further rubbing rubbing of of his his legs, legs, 'as 'as this this is is along along of of my my havin' havin' played played with with her her so so much, much, and and made made believe believe as as we we was was turks, turks, and and french, french, and and sharks, sharks, and and every every wariety wariety of of forinners forinners -- -- bless bless you, yes; yes; and and lions lions and and whales, whales, and and i i doen't doen't know know what what all! all! -- -- when when she she warn't warn't no no higher higher than than my my knee. knee. i've i've got got into into the the way way on on it, it, you know. know. why, why, this this here here candle, candle, now!' now!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, gleefully gleefully holding holding out out his his hand hand towards towards it, it, 'i 'i know know wery wery well well that that arter arter she's she's married married and and gone, gone, i i shall shall put put that that candle candle theer, theer, just just the the same same as as now. now. i i know know wery wery well well that that when when i'm i'm here here o' o' nights nights (and (and where where else else should should i i live, live, bless bless your your arts, arts, whatever whatever fortun' fortun' i i come come into!) into!) and and she she ain't ain't here here or or i i ain't ain't theer, theer, i i shall shall put put the the candle candle in in the the winder, winder, and and sit sit afore afore the the fire, fire, pretending pretending i'm i'm expecting expecting of of her, her, like like i'm i'm a a doing doing now. now. there's there's a a babby babby for for you,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with another another roar, roar, 'in 'in the the form form of of a a sea sea porkypine! porkypine! why, why, at at the the present present minute, minute, when when i i see see the the candle candle sparkle sparkle up, up, i i says says to to myself, myself, "she's "she's a a looking looking at at it! it! em'ly's em'ly's a a coming!" coming!" there's there's a a babby babby for for you, in in the the form form of of a a sea sea porkypine! porkypine! right right for for all all that,' that,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, stopping stopping in in his his roar, roar, and and smiting smiting his his hands hands together; together; 'fur 'fur here here she she is!' is!' it it was was only only ham. ham. the the night night should should have have turned turned more more wet wet since since i i came came in, in, for for he he had had a a large large sou'wester sou'wester hat hat on, on, slouched slouched over over his his face. face. 'wheer's 'wheer's em'ly?' em'ly?' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. ham ham made made a a motion motion with with his his head, head, as as if if she she were were outside. outside. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty took took the the light light from from the the window, window, trimmed trimmed it, it, put put it it on on the the table, table, and and was was busily busily stirring stirring the the fire, fire, when when ham, ham, who who had had not not moved, moved, said: said: 'mas'r 'mas'r davy, davy, will will you come come out out a a minute, minute, and and see see what what em'ly em'ly and and me me has has got got to to show show you?' we we went went out. out. as as i i passed passed him him at at the the door, door, i i saw, saw, to to my my astonishment astonishment and and fright, fright, that that he he was was deadly deadly pale. pale. he he pushed pushed me me hastily hastily into into the the open open air, air, and and closed closed the the door door upon upon us. us. only only upon upon us us two. two. 'ham! 'ham! what's what's the the matter?' matter?' 'mas'r 'mas'r davy! davy! -- -- ' ' oh, oh, for for his his broken broken heart, heart, how how dreadfully dreadfully he he wept! wept! i i was was paralysed paralysed by by the the sight sight of of such such grief. grief. i i don't don't know know what what i i thought, thought, or or what what i i dreaded. dreaded. i i could could only only look look at at him. him. 'ham! 'ham! poor poor good good fellow! fellow! for for heaven's heaven's sake, sake, tell tell me me what's what's the the matter!' matter!' 'my 'my love, love, mas'r mas'r davy davy -- -- the the pride pride and and hope hope of of my my art art -- -- her her that that i'd i'd have have died died for, for, and and would would die die for for now now -- -- she's she's gone!' gone!' 'gone!' 'gone!' 'em'ly's 'em'ly's run run away! away! oh, oh, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, think think how how she's she's run run away, away, when when i i pray pray my my good good and and gracious gracious god god to to kill kill her her (her (her that that is is so so dear dear above above all all things) things) sooner sooner than than let let her her come come to to ruin ruin and and disgrace!' disgrace!' the the face face he he turned turned up up to to the the troubled troubled sky, sky, the the quivering quivering of of his his clasped clasped hands, hands, the the agony agony of of his his figure, figure, remain remain associated associated with with the the lonely lonely waste, waste, in in my my remembrance, remembrance, to to this this hour. hour. it it is is always always night night there, there, and and he he is is the the only only object object in in the the scene. scene. 'you're 'you're a a scholar,' scholar,' he he said, said, hurriedly, hurriedly, 'and 'and know know what's what's right right and and best. best. what what am am i i to to say, say, indoors? indoors? how how am am i i ever ever to to break break it it to to him, him, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' i i saw saw the the door door move, move, and and instinctively instinctively tried tried to to hold hold the the latch latch on on the the outside, outside, to to gain gain a a moment's moment's time. time. it it was was too too late. late. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty thrust thrust forth forth his his face; face; and and never never could could i i forget forget the the change change that that came came upon upon it it when when he he saw saw us, us, if if i i were were to to live live five five hundred hundred years. years. i i remember remember a a great great wail wail and and cry, cry, and and the the women women hanging hanging about about him, him, and and we we all all standing standing in in the the room; room; i i with with a a paper paper in in my my hand, hand, which which ham ham had had given given me; me; mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with his his vest vest torn torn open, open, his his hair hair wild, wild, his his face face and and lips lips quite quite white, white, and and blood blood trickling trickling down down his his bosom bosom (it (it had had sprung sprung from from his his mouth, mouth, i i think), think), looking looking fixedly fixedly at at me. me. 'read 'read it, it, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, in in a a low low shivering shivering voice. voice. 'slow, 'slow, please. please. i i doen't doen't know know as as i i can can understand.' understand.' in in the the midst midst of of the the silence silence of of death, death, i i read read thus, thus, from from a a blotted blotted letter: letter: '"when '"when you, who who love love me me so so much much better better than than i i ever ever have have deserved, deserved, even even when when my my mind mind was was innocent, innocent, see see this, this, i i shall shall be be far far away."' away."' 'i 'i shall shall be be fur fur away,' away,' he he repeated repeated slowly. slowly. 'stop! 'stop! em'ly em'ly fur fur away. away. well!' well!' '"when '"when i i leave leave my my dear dear home home -- -- my my dear dear home home -- -- oh, oh, my my dear dear home! home! -- -- in in the the morning,"' morning,"' the the letter letter bore bore date date on on the the previous previous night: night: '" '" -- -- it it will will be be never never to to come come back, back, unless unless he he brings brings me me back back a a lady. lady. this this will will be be found found at at night, night, many many hours hours after, after, instead instead of of me. me. oh, oh, if if you knew knew how how my my heart heart is is torn. torn. if if even even you, that that i i have have wronged wronged so so much, much, that that never never can can forgive forgive me, me, could could only only know know what what i i suffer! suffer! i i am am too too wicked wicked to to write write about about myself! myself! oh, oh, take take comfort comfort in in thinking thinking that that i i am am so so bad. bad. oh, oh, for for mercy's mercy's sake, sake, tell tell uncle uncle that that i i never never loved loved him him half half so so dear dear as as now. now. oh, oh, don't don't remember remember how how affectionate affectionate and and kind kind you have have all all been been to to me me -- -- don't don't remember remember we we were were ever ever to to be be married married -- -- but but try try to to think think as as if if i i died died when when i i was was little, little, and and was was buried buried somewhere. somewhere. pray pray heaven heaven that that i i am am going going away away from, from, have have compassion compassion on on my my uncle! uncle! tell tell him him that that i i never never loved loved him him half half so so dear. dear. be be his his comfort. comfort. love love some some good good girl girl that that will will be be what what i i was was once once to to uncle, uncle, and and be be true true to to you, and and worthy worthy of of you, and and know know no no shame shame but but me. me. god god bless bless all! all! i'll i'll pray pray for for all, all, often, often, on on my my knees. knees. if if he he don't don't bring bring me me back back a a lady, lady, and and i i don't don't pray pray for for my my own own self, self, i'll i'll pray pray for for all. all. my my parting parting love love to to uncle. uncle. my my last last tears, tears, and and my my last last thanks, thanks, for for uncle!"' uncle!"' that that was was all. all. he he stood, stood, long long after after i i had had ceased ceased to to read, read, still still looking looking at at me. me. at at length length i i ventured ventured to to take take his his hand, hand, and and to to entreat entreat him, him, as as well well as as i i could, could, to to endeavour endeavour to to get get some some command command of of himself. himself. he he replied, replied, 'i 'i thankee, thankee, sir, sir, i i thankee!' thankee!' without without moving. moving. ham ham spoke spoke to to him. him. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was so so far far sensible sensible of of his his affliction, affliction, that that he he wrung wrung his his hand; hand; but, but, otherwise, otherwise, he he remained remained in in the the same same state, state, and and no no one one dared dared to to disturb disturb him. him. slowly, slowly, at at last, last, he he moved moved his his eyes eyes from from my my face, face, as as if if he he were were waking waking from from a a vision, vision, and and cast cast them them round round the the room. room. then then he he said, said, in in a a low low voice: voice: 'who's 'who's the the man? man? i i want want to to know know his his name.' name.' ham ham glanced glanced at at me, me, and and suddenly suddenly i i felt felt a a shock shock that that struck struck me me back. back. 'there's 'there's a a man man suspected,' suspected,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'who 'who is is it?' it?' 'mas'r 'mas'r davy!' davy!' implored implored ham. ham. 'go 'go out out a a bit, bit, and and let let me me tell tell him him what what i i must. must. you doen't doen't ought ought to to hear hear it, it, sir.' sir.' i i felt felt the the shock shock again. again. i i sank sank down down in in a a chair, chair, and and tried tried to to utter utter some some reply; reply; but but my my tongue tongue was was fettered, fettered, and and my my sight sight was was weak. weak. 'i 'i want want to to know know his his name!' name!' i i heard heard said said once once more. more. 'for 'for some some time time past,' past,' ham ham faltered, faltered, 'there's 'there's been been a a servant servant about about here, here, at at odd odd times. times. there's there's been been a a gen'lm'n gen'lm'n too. too. both both of of 'em 'em belonged belonged to to one one another.' another.' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty stood stood fixed fixed as as before, before, but but now now looking looking at at him. him. 'the 'the servant,' servant,' pursued pursued ham, ham, 'was 'was seen seen along along with with -- -- our our poor poor girl girl -- -- last last night. night. he's he's been been in in hiding hiding about about here, here, this this week week or or over. over. he he was was thought thought to to have have gone, gone, but but he he was was hiding. hiding. doen't doen't stay, stay, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, doen't!' doen't!' i i felt felt peggotty's peggotty's arm arm round round my my neck, neck, but but i i could could not not have have moved moved if if the the house house had had been been about about to to fall fall upon upon me. me. 'a 'a strange strange chay chay and and hosses hosses was was outside outside town, town, this this morning, morning, on on the the norwich norwich road, road, a'most a'most afore afore the the day day broke,' broke,' ham ham went went on. on. 'the 'the servant servant went went to to it, it, and and come come from from it, it, and and went went to to it it again. again. when when he he went went to to it it again, again, em'ly em'ly was was nigh nigh him. him. the the t'other t'other was was inside. inside. he's he's the the man.' man.' 'for 'for the the lord's lord's love,' love,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, falling falling back, back, and and putting putting out out his his hand, hand, as as if if to to keep keep off off what what he he dreaded. dreaded. 'doen't 'doen't tell tell me me his his name's name's steerforth!' steerforth!' 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' exclaimed exclaimed ham, ham, in in a a broken broken voice, voice, 'it 'it ain't ain't no no fault fault of of yourn yourn -- -- and and i i am am far far from from laying laying of of it it to to you -- -- but but his his name name is is steerforth, steerforth, and and he's he's a a damned damned villain!' villain!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty uttered uttered no no cry, cry, and and shed shed no no tear, tear, and and moved moved no no more, more, until until he he seemed seemed to to wake wake again, again, all all at at once, once, and and pulled pulled down down his his rough rough coat coat from from its its peg peg in in a a corner. corner. 'bear 'bear a a hand hand with with this! this! i'm i'm struck struck of of a a heap, heap, and and can't can't do do it,' it,' he he said, said, impatiently. impatiently. 'bear 'bear a a hand hand and and help help me. me. well!' well!' when when somebody somebody had had done done so. so. 'now 'now give give me me that that theer theer hat!' hat!' ham ham asked asked him him whither whither he he was was going. going. 'i'm 'i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my niece. niece. i'm i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my em'ly. em'ly. i'm i'm a a going, going, first, first, to to stave stave in in that that theer theer boat, boat, and and sink sink it it where where i i would would have have drownded drownded him, him, as as i'm i'm a a living living soul, soul, if if i i had had had had one one thought thought of of what what was was in in him! him! as as he he sat sat afore afore me,' me,' he he said, said, wildly, wildly, holding holding out out his his clenched clenched right right hand, hand, 'as 'as he he sat sat afore afore me, me, face face to to face, face, strike strike me me down down dead, dead, but but i'd i'd have have drownded drownded him, him, and and thought thought it it right! right! -- -- i'm i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my niece.' niece.' 'where?' 'where?' cried cried ham, ham, interposing interposing himself himself before before the the door. door. 'anywhere! 'anywhere! i'm i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my niece niece through through the the wureld. wureld. i'm i'm a a going going to to find find my my poor poor niece niece in in her her shame, shame, and and bring bring her her back. back. no no one one stop stop me! me! i i tell tell you i'm i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my niece!' niece!' 'no, 'no, no!' no!' cried cried mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, coming coming between between them, them, in in a a fit fit of of crying. crying. 'no, 'no, no, no, dan'l, dan'l, not not as as you are are now. now. seek seek her her in in a a little little while, while, my my lone lone lorn lorn dan'l, dan'l, and and that'll that'll be be but but right! right! but but not not as as you are are now. now. sit sit ye ye down, down, and and give give me me your your forgiveness forgiveness for for having having ever ever been been a a worrit worrit to to you, dan'l dan'l -- -- what what have have my my contraries contraries ever ever been been to to this! this! -- -- and and let let us us speak speak a a word word about about them them times times when when she she was was first first an an orphan, orphan, and and when when ham ham was was too, too, and and when when i i was was a a poor poor widder widder woman, woman, and and you took took me me in. in. it'll it'll soften soften your your poor poor heart, heart, dan'l,' dan'l,' laying laying her her head head upon upon his his shoulder, shoulder, 'and 'and you'll you'll bear bear your your sorrow sorrow better; better; for for you know know the the promise, promise, dan'l, dan'l, "as "as you have have done done it it unto unto one one of of the the least least of of these, these, you have have done done it it unto unto me", me", -- -- and and that that can can never never fail fail under under this this roof, roof, that's that's been been our our shelter shelter for for so so many, many, many many year!' year!' he he was was quite quite passive passive now; now; and and when when i i heard heard him him crying, crying, the the impulse impulse that that had had been been upon upon me me to to go go down down upon upon my my knees, knees, and and ask ask their their pardon pardon for for the the desolation desolation i i had had caused, caused, and and curse curse steerforth, steerforth, yielded yielded to to a a better better feeling, feeling, my my overcharged overcharged heart heart found found the the same same relief, relief, and and i i cried cried too. too. chapter chapter 32. 32. the the beginning beginning of of a a long long journey journey what what is is natural natural in in me, me, is is natural natural in in many many other other men, men, i i infer, infer, and and so so i i am am not not afraid afraid to to write write that that i i never never had had loved loved steerforth steerforth better better than than when when the the ties ties that that bound bound me me to to him him were were broken. broken. in in the the keen keen distress distress of of the the discovery discovery of of his his unworthiness, unworthiness, i i thought thought more more of of all all that that was was brilliant brilliant in in him, him, i i softened softened more more towards towards all all that that was was good good in in him, him, i i did did more more justice justice to to the the qualities qualities that that might might have have made made him him a a man man of of a a noble noble nature nature and and a a great great name, name, than than ever ever i i had had done done in in the the height height of of my my devotion devotion to to him. him. deeply deeply as as i i felt felt my my own own unconscious unconscious part part in in his his pollution pollution of of an an honest honest home, home, i i believed believed that that if if i i had had been been brought brought face face to to face face with with him, him, i i could could not not have have uttered uttered one one reproach. reproach. i i should should have have loved loved him him so so well well still still -- -- though though he he fascinated fascinated me me no no longer longer -- -- i i should should have have held held in in so so much much tenderness tenderness the the memory memory of of my my affection affection for for him, him, that that i i think think i i should should have have been been as as weak weak as as a a spirit-wounded spirit-wounded child, child, in in all all but but the the entertainment entertainment of of a a thought thought that that we we could could ever ever be be re-united. re-united. that that thought thought i i never never had. had. i i felt, felt, as as he he had had felt, felt, that that all all was was at at an an end end between between us. us. what what his his remembrances remembrances of of me me were, were, i i have have never never known known -- -- they they were were light light enough, enough, perhaps, perhaps, and and easily easily dismissed dismissed -- -- but but mine mine of of him him were were as as the the remembrances remembrances of of a a cherished cherished friend, friend, who who was was dead. dead. yes, yes, steerforth, steerforth, long long removed removed from from the the scenes scenes of of this this poor poor history! history! my my sorrow sorrow may may bear bear involuntary involuntary witness witness against against you at at the the judgement judgement throne; throne; but but my my angry angry thoughts thoughts or or my my reproaches reproaches never never will, will, i i know! know! the the news news of of what what had had happened happened soon soon spread spread through through the the town; town; insomuch insomuch that that as as i i passed passed along along the the streets streets next next morning, morning, i i overheard overheard the the people people speaking speaking of of it it at at their their doors. doors. many many were were hard hard upon upon her, her, some some few few were were hard hard upon upon him, him, but but towards towards her her second second father father and and her her lover lover there there was was but but one one sentiment. sentiment. among among all all kinds kinds of of people people a a respect respect for for them them in in their their distress distress prevailed, prevailed, which which was was full full of of gentleness gentleness and and delicacy. delicacy. the the seafaring seafaring men men kept kept apart, apart, when when those those two two were were seen seen early, early, walking walking with with slow slow steps steps on on the the beach; beach; and and stood stood in in knots, knots, talking talking compassionately compassionately among among themselves. themselves. it it was was on on the the beach, beach, close close down down by by the the sea, sea, that that i i found found them. them. it it would would have have been been easy easy to to perceive perceive that that they they had had not not slept slept all all last last night, night, even even if if peggotty peggotty had had failed failed to to tell tell me me of of their their still still sitting sitting just just as as i i left left them, them, when when it it was was broad broad day. day. they they looked looked worn; worn; and and i i thought thought mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's head head was was bowed bowed in in one one night night more more than than in in all all the the years years i i had had known known him. him. but but they they were were both both as as grave grave and and steady steady as as the the sea sea itself, itself, then then lying lying beneath beneath a a dark dark sky, sky, waveless waveless -- -- yet yet with with a a heavy heavy roll roll upon upon it, it, as as if if it it breathed breathed in in its its rest rest -- -- and and touched, touched, on on the the horizon, horizon, with with a a strip strip of of silvery silvery light light from from the the unseen unseen sun. sun. 'we 'we have have had had a a mort mort of of talk, talk, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to me, me, when when we we had had all all three three walked walked a a little little while while in in silence, silence, 'of 'of what what we we ought ought and and doen't doen't ought ought to to do. do. but but we we see see our our course course now.' now.' i i happened happened to to glance glance at at ham, ham, then then looking looking out out to to sea sea upon upon the the distant distant light, light, and and a a frightful frightful thought thought came came into into my my mind mind -- -- not not that that his his face face was was angry, angry, for for it it was was not; not; i i recall recall nothing nothing but but an an expression expression of of stern stern determination determination in in it it -- -- that that if if ever ever he he encountered encountered steerforth, steerforth, he he would would kill kill him. him. 'my 'my dooty dooty here, here, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'is 'is done. done. i'm i'm a a going going to to seek seek my my -- -- ' ' he he stopped, stopped, and and went went on on in in a a firmer firmer voice: voice: 'i'm 'i'm a a going going to to seek seek her. her. that's that's my my dooty dooty evermore.' evermore.' he he shook shook his his head head when when i i asked asked him him where where he he would would seek seek her, her, and and inquired inquired if if i i were were going going to to london london tomorrow? tomorrow? i i told told him him i i had had not not gone gone today, today, fearing fearing to to lose lose the the chance chance of of being being of of any any service service to to him; him; but but that that i i was was ready ready to to go go when when he he would. would. 'i'll 'i'll go go along along with with you, sir,' sir,' he he rejoined, rejoined, 'if 'if you're you're agreeable, agreeable, tomorrow.' tomorrow.' we we walked walked again, again, for for a a while, while, in in silence. silence. 'ham,'he 'ham,'he presently presently resumed,'he'll resumed,'he'll hold hold to to his his present present work, work, and and go go and and live live along along with with my my sister. sister. the the old old boat boat yonder yonder -- -- ' ' 'will 'will you desert desert the the old old boat, boat, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' i i gently gently interposed. interposed. 'my 'my station, station, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he returned, returned, 'ain't 'ain't there there no no longer; longer; and and if if ever ever a a boat boat foundered, foundered, since since there there was was darkness darkness on on the the face face of of the the deep, deep, that that one's one's gone gone down. down. but but no, no, sir, sir, no; no; i i doen't doen't mean mean as as it it should should be be deserted. deserted. fur fur from from that.' that.' we we walked walked again again for for a a while, while, as as before, before, until until he he explained: explained: 'my 'my wishes wishes is, is, sir, sir, as as it it shall shall look, look, day day and and night, night, winter winter and and summer, summer, as as it it has has always always looked, looked, since since she she fust fust know'd know'd it. it. if if ever ever she she should should come come a a wandering wandering back, back, i i wouldn't wouldn't have have the the old old place place seem seem to to cast cast her her off, off, you understand, understand, but but seem seem to to tempt tempt her her to to draw draw nigher nigher to to 't, 't, and and to to peep peep in, in, maybe, maybe, like like a a ghost, ghost, out out of of the the wind wind and and rain, rain, through through the the old old winder, winder, at at the the old old seat seat by by the the fire. fire. then, then, maybe, maybe, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, seein' seein' none none but but missis missis gummidge gummidge there, there, she she might might take take heart heart to to creep creep in, in, trembling; trembling; and and might might come come to to be be laid laid down down in in her her old old bed, bed, and and rest rest her her weary weary head head where where it it was was once once so so gay.' gay.' i i could could not not speak speak to to him him in in reply, reply, though though i i tried. tried. 'every 'every night,' night,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'as 'as reg'lar reg'lar as as the the night night comes, comes, the the candle candle must must be be stood stood in in its its old old pane pane of of glass, glass, that that if if ever ever she she should should see see it, it, it it may may seem seem to to say say "come "come back, back, my my child, child, come come back!" back!" if if ever ever there's there's a a knock, knock, ham ham (partic'ler (partic'ler a a soft soft knock), knock), arter arter dark, dark, at at your your aunt's aunt's door, door, doen't doen't you go go nigh nigh it. it. let let it it be be her her -- -- not not you -- -- that that sees sees my my fallen fallen child!' child!' he he walked walked a a little little in in front front of of us, us, and and kept kept before before us us for for some some minutes. minutes. during during this this interval, interval, i i glanced glanced at at ham ham again, again, and and observing observing the the same same expression expression on on his his face, face, and and his his eyes eyes still still directed directed to to the the distant distant light, light, i i touched touched his his arm. arm. twice twice i i called called him him by by his his name, name, in in the the tone tone in in which which i i might might have have tried tried to to rouse rouse a a sleeper, sleeper, before before he he heeded heeded me. me. when when i i at at last last inquired inquired on on what what his his thoughts thoughts were were so so bent, bent, he he replied: replied: 'on 'on what's what's afore afore me, me, mas'r mas'r davy; davy; and and over over yon.' yon.' 'on 'on the the life life before before you, do do you mean?' mean?' he he had had pointed pointed confusedly confusedly out out to to sea. sea. 'ay, 'ay, mas'r mas'r davy. davy. i i doen't doen't rightly rightly know know how how 'tis, 'tis, but but from from over over yon yon there there seemed seemed to to me me to to come come -- -- the the end end of of it it like,' like,' looking looking at at me me as as if if he he were were waking, waking, but but with with the the same same determined determined face. face. 'what 'what end?' end?' i i asked, asked, possessed possessed by by my my former former fear. fear. 'i 'i doen't doen't know,'he know,'he said, said, thoughtfully; thoughtfully; 'i 'i was was calling calling to to mind mind that that the the beginning beginning of of it it all all did did take take place place here here -- -- and and then then the the end end come. come. but but it's it's gone! gone! mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he added; added; answering, answering, as as i i think, think, my my look; look; 'you han't han't no no call call to to be be afeerd afeerd of of me: me: but but i'm i'm kiender kiender muddled; muddled; i i don't don't fare fare to to feel feel no no matters,' matters,' -- -- which which was was as as much much as as to to say say that that he he was was not not himself, himself, and and quite quite confounded. confounded. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty stopping stopping for for us us to to join join him: him: we we did did so, so, and and said said no no more. more. the the remembrance remembrance of of this, this, in in connexion connexion with with my my former former thought, thought, however, however, haunted haunted me me at at intervals, intervals, even even until until the the inexorable inexorable end end came came at at its its appointed appointed time. time. we we insensibly insensibly approached approached the the old old boat, boat, and and entered. entered. mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, no no longer longer moping moping in in her her especial especial corner, corner, was was busy busy preparing preparing breakfast. breakfast. she she took took mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's hat, hat, and and placed placed his his seat seat for for him, him, and and spoke spoke so so comfortably comfortably and and softly, softly, that that i i hardly hardly knew knew her. her. 'dan'l, 'dan'l, my my good good man,' man,' said said she, she, 'you must must eat eat and and drink, drink, and and keep keep up up your your strength, strength, for for without without it it you'll you'll do do nowt. nowt. try, try, that's that's a a dear dear soul! soul! an an if if i i disturb disturb you with with my my clicketten,' clicketten,' she she meant meant her her chattering, chattering, 'tell 'tell me me so, so, dan'l, dan'l, and and i i won't.' won't.' when when she she had had served served us us all, all, she she withdrew withdrew to to the the window, window, where where she she sedulously sedulously employed employed herself herself in in repairing repairing some some shirts shirts and and other other clothes clothes belonging belonging to to mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and neatly neatly folding folding and and packing packing them them in in an an old old oilskin oilskin bag, bag, such such as as sailors sailors carry. carry. meanwhile, meanwhile, she she continued continued talking, talking, in in the the same same quiet quiet manner: manner: 'all 'all times times and and seasons, seasons, you know, know, dan'l,' dan'l,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, 'i 'i shall shall be be allus allus here, here, and and everythink everythink will will look look accordin' accordin' to to your your wishes. wishes. i'm i'm a a poor poor scholar, scholar, but but i i shall shall write write to to you, odd odd times, times, when when you're you're away, away, and and send send my my letters letters to to mas'r mas'r davy. davy. maybe maybe you'll you'll write write to to me me too, too, dan'l, dan'l, odd odd times, times, and and tell tell me me how how you fare fare to to feel feel upon upon your your lone lone lorn lorn journies.' journies.' 'you'll 'you'll be be a a solitary solitary woman woman heer, heer, i'm i'm afeerd!' afeerd!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'no, 'no, no, no, dan'l,' dan'l,' she she returned, returned, 'i 'i shan't shan't be be that. that. doen't doen't you mind mind me. me. i i shall shall have have enough enough to to do do to to keep keep a a beein beein for for you' (mrs. (mrs. gummidge gummidge meant meant a a home), home), 'again 'again you come come back back -- -- to to keep keep a a beein beein here here for for any any that that may may hap hap to to come come back, back, dan'l. dan'l. in in the the fine fine time, time, i i shall shall set set outside outside the the door door as as i i used used to to do. do. if if any any should should come come nigh, nigh, they they shall shall see see the the old old widder widder woman woman true true to to 'em, 'em, a a long long way way off.' off.' what what a a change change in in mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge in in a a little little time! time! she she was was another another woman. woman. she she was was so so devoted, devoted, she she had had such such a a quick quick perception perception of of what what it it would would be be well well to to say, say, and and what what it it would would be be well well to to leave leave unsaid; unsaid; she she was was so so forgetful forgetful of of herself, herself, and and so so regardful regardful of of the the sorrow sorrow about about her, her, that that i i held held her her in in a a sort sort of of veneration. veneration. the the work work she she did did that that day! day! there there were were many many things things to to be be brought brought up up from from the the beach beach and and stored stored in in the the outhouse outhouse -- -- as as oars, oars, nets, nets, sails, sails, cordage, cordage, spars, spars, lobster-pots, lobster-pots, bags bags of of ballast, ballast, and and the the like; like; and and though though there there was was abundance abundance of of assistance assistance rendered, rendered, there there being being not not a a pair pair of of working working hands hands on on all all that that shore shore but but would would have have laboured laboured hard hard for for mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and been been well well paid paid in in being being asked asked to to do do it, it, yet yet she she persisted, persisted, all all day day long, long, in in toiling toiling under under weights weights that that she she was was quite quite unequal unequal to, to, and and fagging fagging to to and and fro fro on on all all sorts sorts of of unnecessary unnecessary errands. errands. as as to to deploring deploring her her misfortunes, misfortunes, she she appeared appeared to to have have entirely entirely lost lost the the recollection recollection of of ever ever having having had had any. any. she she preserved preserved an an equable equable cheerfulness cheerfulness in in the the midst midst of of her her sympathy, sympathy, which which was was not not the the least least astonishing astonishing part part of of the the change change that that had had come come over over her. her. querulousness querulousness was was out out of of the the question. question. i i did did not not even even observe observe her her voice voice to to falter, falter, or or a a tear tear to to escape escape from from her her eyes, eyes, the the whole whole day day through, through, until until twilight; twilight; when when she she and and i i and and mr. mr. peggotty peggotty being being alone alone together, together, and and he he having having fallen fallen asleep asleep in in perfect perfect exhaustion, exhaustion, she she broke broke into into a a half-suppressed half-suppressed fit fit of of sobbing sobbing and and crying, crying, and and taking taking me me to to the the door, door, said, said, 'ever 'ever bless bless you, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, be be a a friend friend to to him, him, poor poor dear!' dear!' then, then, she she immediately immediately ran ran out out of of the the house house to to wash wash her her face, face, in in order order that that she she might might sit sit quietly quietly beside beside him, him, and and be be found found at at work work there, there, when when he he should should awake. awake. in in short short i i left left her, her, when when i i went went away away at at night, night, the the prop prop and and staff staff of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's affliction; affliction; and and i i could could not not meditate meditate enough enough upon upon the the lesson lesson that that i i read read in in mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, and and the the new new experience experience she she unfolded unfolded to to me. me. it it was was between between nine nine and and ten ten o'clock o'clock when, when, strolling strolling in in a a melancholy melancholy manner manner through through the the town, town, i i stopped stopped at at mr. mr. omer's omer's door. door. mr. mr. omer omer had had taken taken it it so so much much to to heart, heart, his his daughter daughter told told me, me, that that he he had had been been very very low low and and poorly poorly all all day, day, and and had had gone gone to to bed bed without without his his pipe. pipe. 'a 'a deceitful, deceitful, bad-hearted bad-hearted girl,' girl,' said said mrs. mrs. joram. joram. 'there 'there was was no no good good in in her, her, ever!' ever!' 'don't 'don't say say so,' so,' i i returned. returned. 'you don't don't think think so.' so.' 'yes, 'yes, i i do!' do!' cried cried mrs. mrs. joram, joram, angrily. angrily. 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said i. i. mrs. mrs. joram joram tossed tossed her her head, head, endeavouring endeavouring to to be be very very stern stern and and cross; cross; but but she she could could not not command command her her softer softer self, self, and and began began to to cry. cry. i i was was young, young, to to be be sure; sure; but but i i thought thought much much the the better better of of her her for for this this sympathy, sympathy, and and fancied fancied it it became became her, her, as as a a virtuous virtuous wife wife and and mother, mother, very very well well indeed. indeed. 'what 'what will will she she ever ever do!' do!' sobbed sobbed minnie. minnie. 'where 'where will will she she go! go! what what will will become become of of her! her! oh, oh, how how could could she she be be so so cruel, cruel, to to herself herself and and him!' him!' i i remembered remembered the the time time when when minnie minnie was was a a young young and and pretty pretty girl; girl; and and i i was was glad glad she she remembered remembered it it too, too, so so feelingly. feelingly. 'my 'my little little minnie,' minnie,' said said mrs. mrs. joram, joram, 'has 'has only only just just now now been been got got to to sleep. sleep. even even in in her her sleep sleep she she is is sobbing sobbing for for em'ly. em'ly. all all day day long, long, little little minnie minnie has has cried cried for for her, her, and and asked asked me, me, over over and and over over again, again, whether whether em'ly em'ly was was wicked? wicked? what what can can i i say say to to her, her, when when em'ly em'ly tied tied a a ribbon ribbon off off her her own own neck neck round round little little minnie's minnie's the the last last night night she she was was here, here, and and laid laid her her head head down down on on the the pillow pillow beside beside her her till till she she was was fast fast asleep! asleep! the the ribbon's ribbon's round round my my little little minnie's minnie's neck neck now. now. it it ought ought not not to to be, be, perhaps, perhaps, but but what what can can i i do? do? em'ly em'ly is is very very bad, bad, but but they they were were fond fond of of one one another. another. and and the the child child knows knows nothing!' nothing!' mrs. mrs. joram joram was was so so unhappy unhappy that that her her husband husband came came out out to to take take care care of of her. her. leaving leaving them them together, together, i i went went home home to to peggotty's; peggotty's; more more melancholy melancholy myself, myself, if if possible, possible, than than i i had had been been yet. yet. that that good good creature creature -- -- i i mean mean peggotty peggotty -- -- all all untired untired by by her her late late anxieties anxieties and and sleepless sleepless nights, nights, was was at at her her brother's, brother's, where where she she meant meant to to stay stay till till morning. morning. an an old old woman, woman, who who had had been been employed employed about about the the house house for for some some weeks weeks past, past, while while peggotty peggotty had had been been unable unable to to attend attend to to it, it, was was the the house's house's only only other other occupant occupant besides besides myself. myself. as as i i had had no no occasion occasion for for her her services, services, i i sent sent her her to to bed, bed, by by no no means means against against her her will, will, and and sat sat down down before before the the kitchen kitchen fire fire a a little little while, while, to to think think about about all all this. this. i i was was blending blending it it with with the the deathbed deathbed of of the the late late mr. mr. barkis, barkis, and and was was driving driving out out with with the the tide tide towards towards the the distance distance at at which which ham ham had had looked looked so so singularly singularly in in the the morning, morning, when when i i was was recalled recalled from from my my wanderings wanderings by by a a knock knock at at the the door. door. there there was was a a knocker knocker upon upon the the door, door, but but it it was was not not that that which which made made the the sound. sound. the the tap tap was was from from a a hand, hand, and and low low down down upon upon the the door, door, as as if if it it were were given given by by a a child. child. it it made made me me start start as as much much as as if if it it had had been been the the knock knock of of a a footman footman to to a a person person of of distinction. distinction. i i opened opened the the door; door; and and at at first first looked looked down, down, to to my my amazement, amazement, on on nothing nothing but but a a great great umbrella umbrella that that appeared appeared to to be be walking walking about about of of itself. itself. but but presently presently i i discovered discovered underneath underneath it, it, miss miss mowcher. mowcher. i i might might not not have have been been prepared prepared to to give give the the little little creature creature a a very very kind kind reception, reception, if, if, on on her her removing removing the the umbrella, umbrella, which which her her utmost utmost efforts efforts were were unable unable to to shut shut up, up, she she had had shown shown me me the the 'volatile' 'volatile' expression expression of of face face which which had had made made so so great great an an impression impression on on me me at at our our first first and and last last meeting. meeting. but but her her face, face, as as she she turned turned it it up up to to mine, mine, was was so so earnest; earnest; and and when when i i relieved relieved her her of of the the umbrella umbrella (which (which would would have have been been an an inconvenient inconvenient one one for for the the irish irish giant), giant), she she wrung wrung her her little little hands hands in in such such an an afflicted afflicted manner; manner; that that i i rather rather inclined inclined towards towards her. her. 'miss 'miss mowcher!' mowcher!' said said i, i, after after glancing glancing up up and and down down the the empty empty street, street, without without distinctly distinctly knowing knowing what what i i expected expected to to see see besides; besides; 'how 'how do do you come come here? here? what what is is the the matter?' matter?' she she motioned motioned to to me me with with her her short short right right arm, arm, to to shut shut the the umbrella umbrella for for her; her; and and passing passing me me hurriedly, hurriedly, went went into into the the kitchen. kitchen. when when i i had had closed closed the the door, door, and and followed, followed, with with the the umbrella umbrella in in my my hand, hand, i i found found her her sitting sitting on on the the corner corner of of the the fender fender -- -- it it was was a a low low iron iron one, one, with with two two flat flat bars bars at at top top to to stand stand plates plates upon upon -- -- in in the the shadow shadow of of the the boiler, boiler, swaying swaying herself herself backwards backwards and and forwards, forwards, and and chafing chafing her her hands hands upon upon her her knees knees like like a a person person in in pain. pain. quite quite alarmed alarmed at at being being the the only only recipient recipient of of this this untimely untimely visit, visit, and and the the only only spectator spectator of of this this portentous portentous behaviour, behaviour, i i exclaimed exclaimed again, again, 'pray 'pray tell tell me, me, miss miss mowcher, mowcher, what what is is the the matter! matter! are are you ill?' ill?' 'my 'my dear dear young young soul,' soul,' returned returned miss miss mowcher, mowcher, squeezing squeezing her her hands hands upon upon her her heart heart one one over over the the other. other. 'i 'i am am ill ill here, here, i i am am very very ill. ill. to to think think that that it it should should come come to to this, this, when when i i might might have have known known it it and and perhaps perhaps prevented prevented it, it, if if i i hadn't hadn't been been a a thoughtless thoughtless fool!' fool!' again again her her large large bonnet bonnet (very (very disproportionate disproportionate to to the the figure) figure) went went backwards backwards and and forwards, forwards, in in her her swaying swaying of of her her little little body body to to and and fro; fro; while while a a most most gigantic gigantic bonnet bonnet rocked, rocked, in in unison unison with with it, it, upon upon the the wall. wall. 'i 'i am am surprised,' surprised,' i i began, began, 'to 'to see see you so so distressed distressed and and serious' serious' -- -- when when she she interrupted interrupted me. me. 'yes, 'yes, it's it's always always so!' so!' she she said. said. 'they 'they are are all all surprised, surprised, these these inconsiderate inconsiderate young young people, people, fairly fairly and and full full grown, grown, to to see see any any natural natural feeling feeling in in a a little little thing thing like like me! me! they they make make a a plaything plaything of of me, me, use use me me for for their their amusement, amusement, throw throw me me away away when when they they are are tired, tired, and and wonder wonder that that i i feel feel more more than than a a toy toy horse horse or or a a wooden wooden soldier! soldier! yes, yes, yes, yes, that's that's the the way. way. the the old old way!' way!' 'it 'it may may be, be, with with others,' others,' i i returned, returned, 'but 'but i i do do assure assure you it it is is not not with with me. me. perhaps perhaps i i ought ought not not to to be be at at all all surprised surprised to to see see you as as you are are now: now: i i know know so so little little of of you. i i said, said, without without consideration, consideration, what what i i thought.' thought.' 'what 'what can can i i do?' do?' returned returned the the little little woman, woman, standing standing up, up, and and holding holding out out her her arms arms to to show show herself. herself. 'see! 'see! what what i i am, am, my my father father was; was; and and my my sister sister is; is; and and my my brother brother is. is. i i have have worked worked for for sister sister and and brother brother these these many many years years -- -- hard, hard, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield -- -- all all day. day. i i must must live. live. i i do do no no harm. harm. if if there there are are people people so so unreflecting unreflecting or or so so cruel, cruel, as as to to make make a a jest jest of of me, me, what what is is left left for for me me to to do do but but to to make make a a jest jest of of myself, myself, them, them, and and everything? everything? if if i i do do so, so, for for the the time, time, whose whose fault fault is is that? that? mine?' mine?' no. no. not not miss miss mowcher's, mowcher's, i i perceived. perceived. 'if 'if i i had had shown shown myself myself a a sensitive sensitive dwarf dwarf to to your your false false friend,' friend,' pursued pursued the the little little woman, woman, shaking shaking her her head head at at me, me, with with reproachful reproachful earnestness, earnestness, 'how 'how much much of of his his help help or or good good will will do do you think think i i should should ever ever have have had? had? if if little little mowcher mowcher (who (who had had no no hand, hand, young young gentleman, gentleman, in in the the making making of of herself) herself) addressed addressed herself herself to to him, him, or or the the like like of of him, him, because because of of her her misfortunes, misfortunes, when when do do you suppose suppose her her small small voice voice would would have have been been heard? heard? little little mowcher mowcher would would have have as as much much need need to to live, live, if if she she was was the the bitterest bitterest and and dullest dullest of of pigmies; pigmies; but but she she couldn't couldn't do do it. it. no. no. she she might might whistle whistle for for her her bread bread and and butter butter till till she she died died of of air.' air.' miss miss mowcher mowcher sat sat down down on on the the fender fender again, again, and and took took out out her her handkerchief, handkerchief, and and wiped wiped her her eyes. eyes. 'be 'be thankful thankful for for me, me, if if you have have a a kind kind heart, heart, as as i i think think you have,' have,' she she said, said, 'that 'that while while i i know know well well what what i i am, am, i i can can be be cheerful cheerful and and endure endure it it all. all. i i am am thankful thankful for for myself, myself, at at any any rate, rate, that that i i can can find find my my tiny tiny way way through through the the world, world, without without being being beholden beholden to to anyone; anyone; and and that that in in return return for for all all that that is is thrown thrown at at me, me, in in folly folly or or vanity, vanity, as as i i go go along, along, i i can can throw throw bubbles bubbles back. back. if if i i don't don't brood brood over over all all i i want, want, it it is is the the better better for for me, me, and and not not the the worse worse for for anyone. anyone. if if i i am am a a plaything plaything for for you giants, giants, be be gentle gentle with with me.' me.' miss miss mowcher mowcher replaced replaced her her handkerchief handkerchief in in her her pocket, pocket, looking looking at at me me with with very very intent intent expression expression all all the the while, while, and and pursued: pursued: 'i 'i saw saw you in in the the street street just just now. now. you may may suppose suppose i i am am not not able able to to walk walk as as fast fast as as you, with with my my short short legs legs and and short short breath, breath, and and i i couldn't couldn't overtake overtake you; but but i i guessed guessed where where you came, came, and and came came after after you. i i have have been been here here before, before, today, today, but but the the good good woman woman wasn't wasn't at at home.' home.' 'do 'do you know know her?' her?' i i demanded. demanded. 'i 'i know know of of her, her, and and about about her,' her,' she she replied, replied, 'from 'from omer omer and and joram. joram. i i was was there there at at seven seven o'clock o'clock this this morning. morning. do do you remember remember what what steerforth steerforth said said to to me me about about this this unfortunate unfortunate girl, girl, that that time time when when i i saw saw you both both at at the the inn?' inn?' the the great great bonnet bonnet on on miss miss mowcher's mowcher's head, head, and and the the greater greater bonnet bonnet on on the the wall, wall, began began to to go go backwards backwards and and forwards forwards again again when when she she asked asked this this question. question. i i remembered remembered very very well well what what she she referred referred to, to, having having had had it it in in my my thoughts thoughts many many times times that that day. day. i i told told her her so. so. 'may 'may the the father father of of all all evil evil confound confound him,' him,' said said the the little little woman, woman, holding holding up up her her forefinger forefinger between between me me and and her her sparkling sparkling eyes, eyes, 'and 'and ten ten times times more more confound confound that that wicked wicked servant; servant; but but i i believed believed it it was was you who who had had a a boyish boyish passion passion for for her!' her!' 'i?' 'i?' i i repeated. repeated. 'child, 'child, child! child! in in the the name name of of blind blind ill-fortune,' ill-fortune,' cried cried miss miss mowcher, mowcher, wringing wringing her her hands hands impatiently, impatiently, as as she she went went to to and and fro fro again again upon upon the the fender, fender, 'why 'why did did you praise praise her her so, so, and and blush, blush, and and look look disturbed?' disturbed?' i i could could not not conceal conceal from from myself myself that that i i had had done done this, this, though though for for a a reason reason very very different different from from her her supposition. supposition. 'what 'what did did i i know?' know?' said said miss miss mowcher, mowcher, taking taking out out her her handkerchief handkerchief again, again, and and giving giving one one little little stamp stamp on on the the ground ground whenever, whenever, at at short short intervals, intervals, she she applied applied it it to to her her eyes eyes with with both both hands hands at at once. once. 'he 'he was was crossing crossing you and and wheedling wheedling you, i i saw; saw; and and you were were soft soft wax wax in in his his hands, hands, i i saw. saw. had had i i left left the the room room a a minute, minute, when when his his man man told told me me that that "young "young innocence" innocence" (so (so he he called called you, and and you may may call call him him "old "old guilt" guilt" all all the the days days of of your your life) life) had had set set his his heart heart upon upon her, her, and and she she was was giddy giddy and and liked liked him, him, but but his his master master was was resolved resolved that that no no harm harm should should come come of of it it -- -- more more for for your your sake sake than than for for hers hers -- -- and and that that that that was was their their business business here? here? how how could could i i but but believe believe him? him? i i saw saw steerforth steerforth soothe soothe and and please please you by by his his praise praise of of her! her! you were were the the first first to to mention mention her her name. name. you owned owned to to an an old old admiration admiration of of her. her. you were were hot hot and and cold, cold, and and red red and and white, white, all all at at once once when when i i spoke spoke to to you of of her. her. what what could could i i think think -- -- what what did did i i think think -- -- but but that that you were were a a young young libertine libertine in in everything everything but but experience, experience, and and had had fallen fallen into into hands hands that that had had experience experience enough, enough, and and could could manage manage you (having (having the the fancy) fancy) for for your your own own good? good? oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! they they were were afraid afraid of of my my finding finding out out the the truth,' truth,' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss mowcher, mowcher, getting getting off off the the fender, fender, and and trotting trotting up up and and down down the the kitchen kitchen with with her her two two short short arms arms distressfully distressfully lifted lifted up, up, 'because 'because i i am am a a sharp sharp little little thing thing -- -- i i need need be, be, to to get get through through the the world world at at all! all! -- -- and and they they deceived deceived me me altogether, altogether, and and i i gave gave the the poor poor unfortunate unfortunate girl girl a a letter, letter, which which i i fully fully believe believe was was the the beginning beginning of of her her ever ever speaking speaking to to littimer, littimer, who who was was left left behind behind on on purpose!' purpose!' i i stood stood amazed amazed at at the the revelation revelation of of all all this this perfidy, perfidy, looking looking at at miss miss mowcher mowcher as as she she walked walked up up and and down down the the kitchen kitchen until until she she was was out out of of breath: breath: when when she she sat sat upon upon the the fender fender again, again, and, and, drying drying her her face face with with her her handkerchief, handkerchief, shook shook her her head head for for a a long long time, time, without without otherwise otherwise moving, moving, and and without without breaking breaking silence. silence. 'my 'my country country rounds,' rounds,' she she added added at at length, length, 'brought 'brought me me to to norwich, norwich, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, the the night night before before last. last. what what i i happened happened to to find find there, there, about about their their secret secret way way of of coming coming and and going, going, without without you -- -- which which was was strange strange -- -- led led to to my my suspecting suspecting something something wrong. wrong. i i got got into into the the coach coach from from london london last last night, night, as as it it came came through through norwich, norwich, and and was was here here this this morning. morning. oh, oh, oh, oh, oh! oh! too too late!' late!' poor poor little little mowcher mowcher turned turned so so chilly chilly after after all all her her crying crying and and fretting, fretting, that that she she turned turned round round on on the the fender, fender, putting putting her her poor poor little little wet wet feet feet in in among among the the ashes ashes to to warm warm them, them, and and sat sat looking looking at at the the fire, fire, like like a a large large doll. doll. i i sat sat in in a a chair chair on on the the other other side side of of the the hearth, hearth, lost lost in in unhappy unhappy reflections, reflections, and and looking looking at at the the fire fire too, too, and and sometimes sometimes at at her. her. 'i 'i must must go,' go,' she she said said at at last, last, rising rising as as she she spoke. spoke. 'it's 'it's late. late. you don't don't mistrust mistrust me?' me?' meeting meeting her her sharp sharp glance, glance, which which was was as as sharp sharp as as ever ever when when she she asked asked me, me, i i could could not not on on that that short short challenge challenge answer answer no, no, quite quite frankly. frankly. 'come!' 'come!' said said she, she, accepting accepting the the offer offer of of my my hand hand to to help help her her over over the the fender, fender, and and looking looking wistfully wistfully up up into into my my face, face, 'you know know you wouldn't wouldn't mistrust mistrust me, me, if if i i was was a a full-sized full-sized woman!' woman!' i i felt felt that that there there was was much much truth truth in in this; this; and and i i felt felt rather rather ashamed ashamed of of myself. myself. 'you are are a a young young man,' man,' she she said, said, nodding. nodding. 'take 'take a a word word of of advice, advice, even even from from three three foot foot nothing. nothing. try try not not to to associate associate bodily bodily defects defects with with mental, mental, my my good good friend, friend, except except for for a a solid solid reason.' reason.' she she had had got got over over the the fender fender now, now, and and i i had had got got over over my my suspicion. suspicion. i i told told her her that that i i believed believed she she had had given given me me a a faithful faithful account account of of herself, herself, and and that that we we had had both both been been hapless hapless instruments instruments in in designing designing hands. hands. she she thanked thanked me, me, and and said said i i was was a a good good fellow. fellow. 'now, 'now, mind!' mind!' she she exclaimed, exclaimed, turning turning back back on on her her way way to to the the door, door, and and looking looking shrewdly shrewdly at at me, me, with with her her forefinger forefinger up up again. again. -- -- 'i 'i have have some some reason reason to to suspect, suspect, from from what what i i have have heard heard -- -- my my ears ears are are always always open; open; i i can't can't afford afford to to spare spare what what powers powers i i have have -- -- that that they they are are gone gone abroad. abroad. but but if if ever ever they they return, return, if if ever ever any any one one of of them them returns, returns, while while i i am am alive, alive, i i am am more more likely likely than than another, another, going going about about as as i i do, do, to to find find it it out out soon. soon. whatever whatever i i know, know, you shall shall know. know. if if ever ever i i can can do do anything anything to to serve serve the the poor poor betrayed betrayed girl, girl, i i will will do do it it faithfully, faithfully, please please heaven! heaven! and and littimer littimer had had better better have have a a bloodhound bloodhound at at his his back, back, than than little little mowcher!' mowcher!' i i placed placed implicit implicit faith faith in in this this last last statement, statement, when when i i marked marked the the look look with with which which it it was was accompanied. accompanied. 'trust 'trust me me no no more, more, but but trust trust me me no no less, less, than than you would would trust trust a a full-sized full-sized woman,' woman,' said said the the little little creature, creature, touching touching me me appealingly appealingly on on the the wrist. wrist. 'if 'if ever ever you see see me me again, again, unlike unlike what what i i am am now, now, and and like like what what i i was was when when you first first saw saw me, me, observe observe what what company company i i am am in. in. call call to to mind mind that that i i am am a a very very helpless helpless and and defenceless defenceless little little thing. thing. think think of of me me at at home home with with my my brother brother like like myself myself and and sister sister like like myself, myself, when when my my day's day's work work is is done. done. perhaps perhaps you won't, won't, then, then, be be very very hard hard upon upon me, me, or or surprised surprised if if i i can can be be distressed distressed and and serious. serious. good good night!' night!' i i gave gave miss miss mowcher mowcher my my hand, hand, with with a a very very different different opinion opinion of of her her from from that that which which i i had had hitherto hitherto entertained, entertained, and and opened opened the the door door to to let let her her out. out. it it was was not not a a trifling trifling business business to to get get the the great great umbrella umbrella up, up, and and properly properly balanced balanced in in her her grasp; grasp; but but at at last last i i successfully successfully accomplished accomplished this, this, and and saw saw it it go go bobbing bobbing down down the the street street through through the the rain, rain, without without the the least least appearance appearance of of having having anybody anybody underneath underneath it, it, except except when when a a heavier heavier fall fall than than usual usual from from some some over-charged over-charged water-spout water-spout sent sent it it toppling toppling over, over, on on one one side, side, and and discovered discovered miss miss mowcher mowcher struggling struggling violently violently to to get get it it right. right. after after making making one one or or two two sallies sallies to to her her relief, relief, which which were were rendered rendered futile futile by by the the umbrella's umbrella's hopping hopping on on again, again, like like an an immense immense bird, bird, before before i i could could reach reach it, it, i i came came in, in, went went to to bed, bed, and and slept slept till till morning. morning. in in the the morning morning i i was was joined joined by by mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and by by my my old old nurse, nurse, and and we we went went at at an an early early hour hour to to the the coach coach office, office, where where mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge and and ham ham were were waiting waiting to to take take leave leave of of us. us. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' ham ham whispered, whispered, drawing drawing me me aside, aside, while while mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was stowing stowing his his bag bag among among the the luggage, luggage, 'his 'his life life is is quite quite broke broke up. up. he he doen't doen't know know wheer wheer he's he's going; going; he he doen't doen't know know -- -- what's what's afore afore him; him; he's he's bound bound upon upon a a voyage voyage that'll that'll last, last, on on and and off, off, all all the the rest rest of of his his days, days, take take my my wured wured for for 't, 't, unless unless he he finds finds what what he's he's a a seeking seeking of. of. i i am am sure sure you'll you'll be be a a friend friend to to him, him, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' 'trust 'trust me, me, i i will will indeed,' indeed,' said said i, i, shaking shaking hands hands with with ham ham earnestly. earnestly. 'thankee. 'thankee. thankee, thankee, very very kind, kind, sir. sir. one one thing thing furder. furder. i'm i'm in in good good employ, employ, you know, know, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, and and i i han't han't no no way way now now of of spending spending what what i i gets. gets. money's money's of of no no use use to to me me no no more, more, except except to to live. live. if if you can can lay lay it it out out for for him, him, i i shall shall do do my my work work with with a a better better art. art. though though as as to to that, that, sir,' sir,' and and he he spoke spoke very very steadily steadily and and mildly, mildly, 'you're 'you're not not to to think think but but i i shall shall work work at at all all times, times, like like a a man, man, and and act act the the best best that that lays lays in in my my power!' power!' i i told told him him i i was was well well convinced convinced of of it; it; and and i i hinted hinted that that i i hoped hoped the the time time might might even even come, come, when when he he would would cease cease to to lead lead the the lonely lonely life life he he naturally naturally contemplated contemplated now. now. 'no, 'no, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'all 'all that's that's past past and and over over with with me, me, sir. sir. no no one one can can never never fill fill the the place place that's that's empty. empty. but but you'll you'll bear bear in in mind mind about about the the money, money, as as theer's theer's at at all all times times some some laying laying by by for for him?' him?' reminding reminding him him of of the the fact, fact, that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty derived derived a a steady, steady, though though certainly certainly a a very very moderate moderate income income from from the the bequest bequest of of his his late late brother-in-law, brother-in-law, i i promised promised to to do do so. so. we we then then took took leave leave of of each each other. other. i i cannot cannot leave leave him him even even now, now, without without remembering remembering with with a a pang, pang, at at once once his his modest modest fortitude fortitude and and his his great great sorrow. sorrow. as as to to mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, if if i i were were to to endeavour endeavour to to describe describe how how she she ran ran down down the the street street by by the the side side of of the the coach, coach, seeing seeing nothing nothing but but mr. mr. peggotty peggotty on on the the roof, roof, through through the the tears tears she she tried tried to to repress, repress, and and dashing dashing herself herself against against the the people people who who were were coming coming in in the the opposite opposite direction, direction, i i should should enter enter on on a a task task of of some some difficulty. difficulty. therefore therefore i i had had better better leave leave her her sitting sitting on on a a baker's baker's door-step, door-step, out out of of breath, breath, with with no no shape shape at at all all remaining remaining in in her her bonnet, bonnet, and and one one of of her her shoes shoes off, off, lying lying on on the the pavement pavement at at a a considerable considerable distance. distance. when when we we got got to to our our journey's journey's end, end, our our first first pursuit pursuit was was to to look look about about for for a a little little lodging lodging for for peggotty, peggotty, where where her her brother brother could could have have a a bed. bed. we we were were so so fortunate fortunate as as to to find find one, one, of of a a very very clean clean and and cheap cheap description, description, over over a a chandler's chandler's shop, shop, only only two two streets streets removed removed from from me. me. when when we we had had engaged engaged this this domicile, domicile, i i bought bought some some cold cold meat meat at at an an eating-house, eating-house, and and took took my my fellow-travellers fellow-travellers home home to to tea; tea; a a proceeding, proceeding, i i regret regret to to state, state, which which did did not not meet meet with with mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's approval, approval, but but quite quite the the contrary. contrary. i i ought ought to to observe, observe, however, however, in in explanation explanation of of that that lady's lady's state state of of mind, mind, that that she she was was much much offended offended by by peggotty's peggotty's tucking tucking up up her her widow's widow's gown gown before before she she had had been been ten ten minutes minutes in in the the place, place, and and setting setting to to work work to to dust dust my my bedroom. bedroom. this this mrs. mrs. crupp crupp regarded regarded in in the the light light of of a a liberty, liberty, and and a a liberty, liberty, she she said, said, was was a a thing thing she she never never allowed. allowed. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty had had made made a a communication communication to to me me on on the the way way to to london london for for which which i i was was not not unprepared. unprepared. it it was, was, that that he he purposed purposed first first seeing seeing mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. as as i i felt felt bound bound to to assist assist him him in in this, this, and and also also to to mediate mediate between between them; them; with with the the view view of of sparing sparing the the mother's mother's feelings feelings as as much much as as possible, possible, i i wrote wrote to to her her that that night. night. i i told told her her as as mildly mildly as as i i could could what what his his wrong wrong was, was, and and what what my my own own share share in in his his injury. injury. i i said said he he was was a a man man in in very very common common life, life, but but of of a a most most gentle gentle and and upright upright character; character; and and that that i i ventured ventured to to express express a a hope hope that that she she would would not not refuse refuse to to see see him him in in his his heavy heavy trouble. trouble. i i mentioned mentioned two two o'clock o'clock in in the the afternoon afternoon as as the the hour hour of of our our coming, coming, and and i i sent sent the the letter letter myself myself by by the the first first coach coach in in the the morning. morning. at at the the appointed appointed time, time, we we stood stood at at the the door door -- -- the the door door of of that that house house where where i i had had been, been, a a few few days days since, since, so so happy: happy: where where my my youthful youthful confidence confidence and and warmth warmth of of heart heart had had been been yielded yielded up up so so freely: freely: which which was was closed closed against against me me henceforth: henceforth: which which was was now now a a waste, waste, a a ruin. ruin. no no littimer littimer appeared. appeared. the the pleasanter pleasanter face face which which had had replaced replaced his, his, on on the the occasion occasion of of my my last last visit, visit, answered answered to to our our summons, summons, and and went went before before us us to to the the drawing-room. drawing-room. mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was was sitting sitting there. there. rosa rosa dartle dartle glided, glided, as as we we went went in, in, from from another another part part of of the the room room and and stood stood behind behind her her chair. chair. i i saw, saw, directly, directly, in in his his mother's mother's face, face, that that she she knew knew from from himself himself what what he he had had done. done. it it was was very very pale; pale; and and bore bore the the traces traces of of deeper deeper emotion emotion than than my my letter letter alone, alone, weakened weakened by by the the doubts doubts her her fondness fondness would would have have raised raised upon upon it, it, would would have have been been likely likely to to create. create. i i thought thought her her more more like like him him than than ever ever i i had had thought thought her; her; and and i i felt, felt, rather rather than than saw, saw, that that the the resemblance resemblance was was not not lost lost on on my my companion. companion. she she sat sat upright upright in in her her arm-chair, arm-chair, with with a a stately, stately, immovable, immovable, passionless passionless air, air, that that it it seemed seemed as as if if nothing nothing could could disturb. disturb. she she looked looked very very steadfastly steadfastly at at mr. mr. peggotty peggotty when when he he stood stood before before her; her; and and he he looked looked quite quite as as steadfastly steadfastly at at her. her. rosa rosa dartle's dartle's keen keen glance glance comprehended comprehended all all of of us. us. for for some some moments moments not not a a word word was was spoken. spoken. she she motioned motioned to to mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to be be seated. seated. he he said, said, in in a a low low voice, voice, 'i 'i shouldn't shouldn't feel feel it it nat'ral, nat'ral, ma'am, ma'am, to to sit sit down down in in this this house. house. i'd i'd sooner sooner stand.' stand.' and and this this was was succeeded succeeded by by another another silence, silence, which which she she broke broke thus: thus: 'i 'i know, know, with with deep deep regret, regret, what what has has brought brought you here. here. what what do do you want want of of me? me? what what do do you ask ask me me to to do?' do?' he he put put his his hat hat under under his his arm, arm, and and feeling feeling in in his his breast breast for for emily's emily's letter, letter, took took it it out, out, unfolded unfolded it, it, and and gave gave it it to to her. her. 'please 'please to to read read that, that, ma'am. ma'am. that's that's my my niece's niece's hand!' hand!' she she read read it, it, in in the the same same stately stately and and impassive impassive way, way, -- -- untouched untouched by by its its contents, contents, as as far far as as i i could could see, see, -- -- and and returned returned it it to to him. him. '"unless '"unless he he brings brings me me back back a a lady,"' lady,"' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, tracing tracing out out that that part part with with his his finger. finger. 'i 'i come come to to know, know, ma'am, ma'am, whether whether he he will will keep keep his his wured?' wured?' 'no,' 'no,' she she returned. returned. 'why 'why not?' not?' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'it 'it is is impossible. impossible. he he would would disgrace disgrace himself. himself. you cannot cannot fail fail to to know know that that she she is is far far below below him.' him.' 'raise 'raise her her up!' up!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'she 'she is is uneducated uneducated and and ignorant.' ignorant.' 'maybe 'maybe she's she's not; not; maybe maybe she she is,' is,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i think think not, not, ma'am; ma'am; but but i'm i'm no no judge judge of of them them things. things. teach teach her her better!' better!' 'since 'since you oblige oblige me me to to speak speak more more plainly, plainly, which which i i am am very very unwilling unwilling to to do, do, her her humble humble connexions connexions would would render render such such a a thing thing impossible, impossible, if if nothing nothing else else did.' did.' 'hark 'hark to to this, this, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he returned, returned, slowly slowly and and quietly. quietly. 'you know know what what it it is is to to love love your your child. child. so so do do i. i. if if she she was was a a hundred hundred times times my my child, child, i i couldn't couldn't love love her her more. more. you doen't doen't know know what what it it is is to to lose lose your your child. child. i i do. do. all all the the heaps heaps of of riches riches in in the the wureld wureld would would be be nowt nowt to to me me (if (if they they was was mine) mine) to to buy buy her her back! back! but, but, save save her her from from this this disgrace, disgrace, and and she she shall shall never never be be disgraced disgraced by by us. us. not not one one of of us us that that she's she's growed growed up up among, among, not not one one of of us us that's that's lived lived along along with with her her and and had had her her for for their their all all in in all, all, these these many many year, year, will will ever ever look look upon upon her her pritty pritty face face again. again. we'll we'll be be content content to to let let her her be; be; we'll we'll be be content content to to think think of of her, her, far far off, off, as as if if she she was was underneath underneath another another sun sun and and sky; sky; we'll we'll be be content content to to trust trust her her to to her her husband, husband, -- -- to to her her little little children, children, p'raps, p'raps, -- -- and and bide bide the the time time when when all all of of us us shall shall be be alike alike in in quality quality afore afore our our god!' god!' the the rugged rugged eloquence eloquence with with which which he he spoke, spoke, was was not not devoid devoid of of all all effect. effect. she she still still preserved preserved her her proud proud manner, manner, but but there there was was a a touch touch of of softness softness in in her her voice, voice, as as she she answered: answered: 'i 'i justify justify nothing. nothing. i i make make no no counter-accusations. counter-accusations. but but i i am am sorry sorry to to repeat, repeat, it it is is impossible. impossible. such such a a marriage marriage would would irretrievably irretrievably blight blight my my son's son's career, career, and and ruin ruin his his prospects. prospects. nothing nothing is is more more certain certain than than that that it it never never can can take take place, place, and and never never will. will. if if there there is is any any other other compensation compensation -- -- ' ' 'i 'i am am looking looking at at the the likeness likeness of of the the face,' face,' interrupted interrupted mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a steady steady but but a a kindling kindling eye, eye, 'that 'that has has looked looked at at me, me, in in my my home, home, at at my my fireside, fireside, in in my my boat boat -- -- wheer wheer not? not? -- -- -smiling -smiling and and friendly, friendly, when when it it was was so so treacherous, treacherous, that that i i go go half half wild wild when when i i think think of of it. it. if if the the likeness likeness of of that that face face don't don't turn turn to to burning burning fire, fire, at at the the thought thought of of offering offering money money to to me me for for my my child's child's blight blight and and ruin, ruin, it's it's as as bad. bad. i i doen't doen't know, know, being being a a lady's, lady's, but but what what it's it's worse.' worse.' she she changed changed now, now, in in a a moment. moment. an an angry angry flush flush overspread overspread her her features; features; and and she she said, said, in in an an intolerant intolerant manner, manner, grasping grasping the the arm-chair arm-chair tightly tightly with with her her hands: hands: 'what 'what compensation compensation can can you make make to to me me for for opening opening such such a a pit pit between between me me and and my my son? son? what what is is your your love love to to mine? mine? what what is is your your separation separation to to ours?' ours?' miss miss dartle dartle softly softly touched touched her, her, and and bent bent down down her her head head to to whisper, whisper, but but she she would would not not hear hear a a word. word. 'no, 'no, rosa, rosa, not not a a word! word! let let the the man man listen listen to to what what i i say! say! my my son, son, who who has has been been the the object object of of my my life, life, to to whom whom its its every every thought thought has has been been devoted, devoted, whom whom i i have have gratified gratified from from a a child child in in every every wish, wish, from from whom whom i i have have had had no no separate separate existence existence since since his his birth, birth, -- -- to to take take up up in in a a moment moment with with a a miserable miserable girl, girl, and and avoid avoid me! me! to to repay repay my my confidence confidence with with systematic systematic deception, deception, for for her her sake, sake, and and quit quit me me for for her! her! to to set set this this wretched wretched fancy, fancy, against against his his mother's mother's claims claims upon upon his his duty, duty, love, love, respect, respect, gratitude gratitude -- -- claims claims that that every every day day and and hour hour of of his his life life should should have have strengthened strengthened into into ties ties that that nothing nothing could could be be proof proof against! against! is is this this no no injury?' injury?' again again rosa rosa dartle dartle tried tried to to soothe soothe her; her; again again ineffectually. ineffectually. 'i 'i say, say, rosa, rosa, not not a a word! word! if if he he can can stake stake his his all all upon upon the the lightest lightest object, object, i i can can stake stake my my all all upon upon a a greater greater purpose. purpose. let let him him go go where where he he will, will, with with the the means means that that my my love love has has secured secured to to him! him! does does he he think think to to reduce reduce me me by by long long absence? absence? he he knows knows his his mother mother very very little little if if he he does. does. let let him him put put away away his his whim whim now, now, and and he he is is welcome welcome back. back. let let him him not not put put her her away away now, now, and and he he never never shall shall come come near near me, me, living living or or dying, dying, while while i i can can raise raise my my hand hand to to make make a a sign sign against against it, it, unless, unless, being being rid rid of of her her for for ever, ever, he he comes comes humbly humbly to to me me and and begs begs for for my my forgiveness. forgiveness. this this is is my my right. right. this this is is the the acknowledgement acknowledgement i i will will have. have. this this is is the the separation separation that that there there is is between between us! us! and and is is this,' this,' she she added, added, looking looking at at her her visitor visitor with with the the proud proud intolerant intolerant air air with with which which she she had had begun, begun, 'no 'no injury?' injury?' while while i i heard heard and and saw saw the the mother mother as as she she said said these these words, words, i i seemed seemed to to hear hear and and see see the the son, son, defying defying them. them. all all that that i i had had ever ever seen seen in in him him of of an an unyielding, unyielding, wilful wilful spirit, spirit, i i saw saw in in her. her. all all the the understanding understanding that that i i had had now now of of his his misdirected misdirected energy, energy, became became an an understanding understanding of of her her character character too, too, and and a a perception perception that that it it was, was, in in its its strongest strongest springs, springs, the the same. same. she she now now observed observed to to me, me, aloud, aloud, resuming resuming her her former former restraint, restraint, that that it it was was useless useless to to hear hear more, more, or or to to say say more, more, and and that that she she begged begged to to put put an an end end to to the the interview. interview. she she rose rose with with an an air air of of dignity dignity to to leave leave the the room, room, when when mr. mr. peggotty peggotty signified signified that that it it was was needless. needless. 'doen't 'doen't fear fear me me being being any any hindrance hindrance to to you, i i have have no no more more to to say, say, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he remarked, remarked, as as he he moved moved towards towards the the door. door. 'i 'i come come heer heer with with no no hope, hope, and and i i take take away away no no hope. hope. i i have have done done what what i i thowt thowt should should be be done, done, but but i i never never looked looked fur fur any any good good to to come come of of my my stan'ning stan'ning where where i i do. do. this this has has been been too too evil evil a a house house fur fur me me and and mine, mine, fur fur me me to to be be in in my my right right senses senses and and expect expect it.' it.' with with this, this, we we departed; departed; leaving leaving her her standing standing by by her her elbow-chair, elbow-chair, a a picture picture of of a a noble noble presence presence and and a a handsome handsome face. face. we we had, had, on on our our way way out, out, to to cross cross a a paved paved hall, hall, with with glass glass sides sides and and roof, roof, over over which which a a vine vine was was trained. trained. its its leaves leaves and and shoots shoots were were green green then, then, and and the the day day being being sunny, sunny, a a pair pair of of glass glass doors doors leading leading to to the the garden garden were were thrown thrown open. open. rosa rosa dartle, dartle, entering entering this this way way with with a a noiseless noiseless step, step, when when we we were were close close to to them, them, addressed addressed herself herself to to me: me: 'you do do well,' well,' she she said, said, 'indeed, 'indeed, to to bring bring this this fellow fellow here!' here!' such such a a concentration concentration of of rage rage and and scorn scorn as as darkened darkened her her face, face, and and flashed flashed in in her her jet-black jet-black eyes, eyes, i i could could not not have have thought thought compressible compressible even even into into that that face. face. the the scar scar made made by by the the hammer hammer was, was, as as usual usual in in this this excited excited state state of of her her features, features, strongly strongly marked. marked. when when the the throbbing throbbing i i had had seen seen before, before, came came into into it it as as i i looked looked at at her, her, she she absolutely absolutely lifted lifted up up her her hand, hand, and and struck struck it. it. 'this 'this is is a a fellow,' fellow,' she she said, said, 'to 'to champion champion and and bring bring here, here, is is he he not? not? you are are a a true true man!' man!' 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' i i returned, returned, 'you are are surely surely not not so so unjust unjust as as to to condemn condemn me!' me!' 'why 'why do do you bring bring division division between between these these two two mad mad creatures?' creatures?' she she returned. returned. 'don't 'don't you know know that that they they are are both both mad mad with with their their own own self-will self-will and and pride?' pride?' 'is 'is it it my my doing?' doing?' i i returned. returned. 'is 'is it it your your doing!' doing!' she she retorted. retorted. 'why 'why do do you bring bring this this man man here?' here?' 'he 'he is is a a deeply-injured deeply-injured man, man, miss miss dartle,' dartle,' i i replied. replied. 'you may may not not know know it.' it.' 'i 'i know know that that james james steerforth,' steerforth,' she she said, said, with with her her hand hand on on her her bosom, bosom, as as if if to to prevent prevent the the storm storm that that was was raging raging there, there, from from being being loud, loud, 'has 'has a a false, false, corrupt corrupt heart, heart, and and is is a a traitor. traitor. but but what what need need i i know know or or care care about about this this fellow, fellow, and and his his common common niece?' niece?' 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' i i returned, returned, 'you deepen deepen the the injury. injury. it it is is sufficient sufficient already. already. i i will will only only say, say, at at parting, parting, that that you do do him him a a great great wrong.' wrong.' 'i 'i do do him him no no wrong,' wrong,' she she returned. returned. 'they 'they are are a a depraved, depraved, worthless worthless set. set. i i would would have have her her whipped!' whipped!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty passed passed on, on, without without a a word, word, and and went went out out at at the the door. door. 'oh, 'oh, shame, shame, miss miss dartle! dartle! shame!' shame!' i i said said indignantly. indignantly. 'how 'how can can you bear bear to to trample trample on on his his undeserved undeserved affliction!' affliction!' 'i 'i would would trample trample on on them them all,' all,' she she answered. answered. 'i 'i would would have have his his house house pulled pulled down. down. i i would would have have her her branded branded on on the the face, face, dressed dressed in in rags, rags, and and cast cast out out in in the the streets streets to to starve. starve. if if i i had had the the power power to to sit sit in in judgement judgement on on her, her, i i would would see see it it done. done. see see it it done? done? i i would would do do it! it! i i detest detest her. her. if if i i ever ever could could reproach reproach her her with with her her infamous infamous condition, condition, i i would would go go anywhere anywhere to to do do so. so. if if i i could could hunt hunt her her to to her her grave, grave, i i would. would. if if there there was was any any word word of of comfort comfort that that would would be be a a solace solace to to her her in in her her dying dying hour, hour, and and only only i i possessed possessed it, it, i i wouldn't wouldn't part part with with it it for for life life itself.' itself.' the the mere mere vehemence vehemence of of her her words words can can convey, convey, i i am am sensible, sensible, but but a a weak weak impression impression of of the the passion passion by by which which she she was was possessed, possessed, and and which which made made itself itself articulate articulate in in her her whole whole figure, figure, though though her her voice, voice, instead instead of of being being raised, raised, was was lower lower than than usual. usual. no no description description i i could could give give of of her her would would do do justice justice to to my my recollection recollection of of her, her, or or to to her her entire entire deliverance deliverance of of herself herself to to her her anger. anger. i i have have seen seen passion passion in in many many forms, forms, but but i i have have never never seen seen it it in in such such a a form form as as that. that. when when i i joined joined mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, he he was was walking walking slowly slowly and and thoughtfully thoughtfully down down the the hill. hill. he he told told me, me, as as soon soon as as i i came came up up with with him, him, that that having having now now discharged discharged his his mind mind of of what what he he had had purposed purposed doing doing in in london, london, he he meant meant 'to 'to set set out out on on his his travels', travels', that that night. night. i i asked asked him him where where he he meant meant to to go? go? he he only only answered, answered, 'i'm 'i'm a a going, going, sir, sir, to to seek seek my my niece.' niece.' we we went went back back to to the the little little lodging lodging over over the the chandler's chandler's shop, shop, and and there there i i found found an an opportunity opportunity of of repeating repeating to to peggotty peggotty what what he he had had said said to to me. me. she she informed informed me, me, in in return, return, that that he he had had said said the the same same to to her her that that morning. morning. she she knew knew no no more more than than i i did, did, where where he he was was going, going, but but she she thought thought he he had had some some project project shaped shaped out out in in his his mind. mind. i i did did not not like like to to leave leave him, him, under under such such circumstances, circumstances, and and we we all all three three dined dined together together off off a a beefsteak beefsteak pie pie -- -- which which was was one one of of the the many many good good things things for for which which peggotty peggotty was was famous famous -- -- and and which which was was curiously curiously flavoured flavoured on on this this occasion, occasion, i i recollect recollect well, well, by by a a miscellaneous miscellaneous taste taste of of tea, tea, coffee, coffee, butter, butter, bacon, bacon, cheese, cheese, new new loaves, loaves, firewood, firewood, candles, candles, and and walnut walnut ketchup, ketchup, continually continually ascending ascending from from the the shop. shop. after after dinner dinner we we sat sat for for an an hour hour or or so so near near the the window, window, without without talking talking much; much; and and then then mr. mr. peggotty peggotty got got up, up, and and brought brought his his oilskin oilskin bag bag and and his his stout stout stick, stick, and and laid laid them them on on the the table. table. he he accepted, accepted, from from his his sister's sister's stock stock of of ready ready money, money, a a small small sum sum on on account account of of his his legacy; legacy; barely barely enough, enough, i i should should have have thought, thought, to to keep keep him him for for a a month. month. he he promised promised to to communicate communicate with with me, me, when when anything anything befell befell him; him; and and he he slung slung his his bag bag about about him, him, took took his his hat hat and and stick, stick, and and bade bade us us both both 'good-bye!' 'good-bye!' 'all 'all good good attend attend you, dear dear old old woman,' woman,' he he said, said, embracing embracing peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and you too, too, mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' shaking shaking hands hands with with me. me. 'i'm 'i'm a-going a-going to to seek seek her, her, fur fur and and wide. wide. if if she she should should come come home home while while i'm i'm away away -- -- but but ah, ah, that that ain't ain't like like to to be! be! -- -- or or if if i i should should bring bring her her back, back, my my meaning meaning is, is, that that she she and and me me shall shall live live and and die die where where no no one one can't can't reproach reproach her. her. if if any any hurt hurt should should come come to to me, me, remember remember that that the the last last words words i i left left for for her her was, was, "my "my unchanged unchanged love love is is with with my my darling darling child, child, and and i i forgive forgive her!"' her!"' he he said said this this solemnly, solemnly, bare-headed; bare-headed; then, then, putting putting on on his his hat, hat, he he went went down down the the stairs, stairs, and and away. away. we we followed followed to to the the door. door. it it was was a a warm, warm, dusty dusty evening, evening, just just the the time time when, when, in in the the great great main main thoroughfare thoroughfare out out of of which which that that by-way by-way turned, turned, there there was was a a temporary temporary lull lull in in the the eternal eternal tread tread of of feet feet upon upon the the pavement, pavement, and and a a strong strong red red sunshine. sunshine. he he turned, turned, alone, alone, at at the the corner corner of of our our shady shady street, street, into into a a glow glow of of light, light, in in which which we we lost lost him. him. rarely rarely did did that that hour hour of of the the evening evening come, come, rarely rarely did did i i wake wake at at night, night, rarely rarely did did i i look look up up at at the the moon, moon, or or stars, stars, or or watch watch the the falling falling rain, rain, or or hear hear the the wind, wind, but but i i thought thought of of his his solitary solitary figure figure toiling toiling on, on, poor poor pilgrim, pilgrim, and and recalled recalled the the words: words: 'i'm 'i'm a a going going to to seek seek her, her, fur fur and and wide. wide. if if any any hurt hurt should should come come to to me, me, remember remember that that the the last last words words i i left left for for her her was, was, "my "my unchanged unchanged love love is is with with my my darling darling child, child, and and i i forgive forgive her!"' her!"' chapter chapter 33. 33. blissful blissful all all this this time, time, i i had had gone gone on on loving loving dora, dora, harder harder than than ever. ever. her her idea idea was was my my refuge refuge in in disappointment disappointment and and distress, distress, and and made made some some amends amends to to me, me, even even for for the the loss loss of of my my friend. friend. the the more more i i pitied pitied myself, myself, or or pitied pitied others, others, the the more more i i sought sought for for consolation consolation in in the the image image of of dora. dora. the the greater greater the the accumulation accumulation of of deceit deceit and and trouble trouble in in the the world, world, the the brighter brighter and and the the purer purer shone shone the the star star of of dora dora high high above above the the world. world. i i don't don't think think i i had had any any definite definite idea idea where where dora dora came came from, from, or or in in what what degree degree she she was was related related to to a a higher higher order order of of beings; beings; but but i i am am quite quite sure sure i i should should have have scouted scouted the the notion notion of of her her being being simply simply human, human, like like any any other other young young lady, lady, with with indignation indignation and and contempt. contempt. if if i i may may so so express express it, it, i i was was steeped steeped in in dora. dora. i i was was not not merely merely over over head head and and ears ears in in love love with with her, her, but but i i was was saturated saturated through through and and through. through. enough enough love love might might have have been been wrung wrung out out of of me, me, metaphorically metaphorically speaking, speaking, to to drown drown anybody anybody in; in; and and yet yet there there would would have have remained remained enough enough within within me, me, and and all all over over me, me, to to pervade pervade my my entire entire existence. existence. the the first first thing thing i i did, did, on on my my own own account, account, when when i i came came back, back, was was to to take take a a night-walk night-walk to to norwood, norwood, and, and, like like the the subject subject of of a a venerable venerable riddle riddle of of my my childhood, childhood, to to go go 'round 'round and and round round the the house, house, without without ever ever touching touching the the house', house', thinking thinking about about dora. dora. i i believe believe the the theme theme of of this this incomprehensible incomprehensible conundrum conundrum was was the the moon. moon. no no matter matter what what it it was, was, i, i, the the moon-struck moon-struck slave slave of of dora, dora, perambulated perambulated round round and and round round the the house house and and garden garden for for two two hours, hours, looking looking through through crevices crevices in in the the palings, palings, getting getting my my chin chin by by dint dint of of violent violent exertion exertion above above the the rusty rusty nails nails on on the the top, top, blowing blowing kisses kisses at at the the lights lights in in the the windows, windows, and and romantically romantically calling calling on on the the night, night, at at intervals, intervals, to to shield shield my my dora dora -- -- i i don't don't exactly exactly know know what what from, from, i i suppose suppose from from fire. fire. perhaps perhaps from from mice, mice, to to which which she she had had a a great great objection. objection. my my love love was was so so much much in in my my mind mind and and it it was was so so natural natural to to me me to to confide confide in in peggotty, peggotty, when when i i found found her her again again by by my my side side of of an an evening evening with with the the old old set set of of industrial industrial implements, implements, busily busily making making the the tour tour of of my my wardrobe, wardrobe, that that i i imparted imparted to to her, her, in in a a sufficiently sufficiently roundabout roundabout way, way, my my great great secret. secret. peggotty peggotty was was strongly strongly interested, interested, but but i i could could not not get get her her into into my my view view of of the the case case at at all. all. she she was was audaciously audaciously prejudiced prejudiced in in my my favour, favour, and and quite quite unable unable to to understand understand why why i i should should have have any any misgivings, misgivings, or or be be low-spirited low-spirited about about it. it. 'the 'the young young lady lady might might think think herself herself well well off,' off,' she she observed, observed, 'to 'to have have such such a a beau. beau. and and as as to to her her pa,' pa,' she she said, said, 'what 'what did did the the gentleman gentleman expect, expect, for for gracious gracious sake!' sake!' i i observed, observed, however, however, that that mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's proctorial proctorial gown gown and and stiff stiff cravat cravat took took peggotty peggotty down down a a little, little, and and inspired inspired her her with with a a greater greater reverence reverence for for the the man man who who was was gradually gradually becoming becoming more more and and more more etherealized etherealized in in my my eyes eyes every every day, day, and and about about whom whom a a reflected reflected radiance radiance seemed seemed to to me me to to beam beam when when he he sat sat erect erect in in court court among among his his papers, papers, like like a a little little lighthouse lighthouse in in a a sea sea of of stationery. stationery. and and by by the the by, by, it it used used to to be be uncommonly uncommonly strange strange to to me me to to consider, consider, i i remember, remember, as as i i sat sat in in court court too, too, how how those those dim dim old old judges judges and and doctors doctors wouldn't wouldn't have have cared cared for for dora, dora, if if they they had had known known her; her; how how they they wouldn't wouldn't have have gone gone out out of of their their senses senses with with rapture, rapture, if if marriage marriage with with dora dora had had been been proposed proposed to to them; them; how how dora dora might might have have sung, sung, and and played played upon upon that that glorified glorified guitar, guitar, until until she she led led me me to to the the verge verge of of madness, madness, yet yet not not have have tempted tempted one one of of those those slow-goers slow-goers an an inch inch out out of of his his road! road! i i despised despised them, them, to to a a man. man. frozen-out frozen-out old old gardeners gardeners in in the the flower-beds flower-beds of of the the heart, heart, i i took took a a personal personal offence offence against against them them all. all. the the bench bench was was nothing nothing to to me me but but an an insensible insensible blunderer. blunderer. the the bar bar had had no no more more tenderness tenderness or or poetry poetry in in it, it, than than the the bar bar of of a a public-house. public-house. taking taking the the management management of of peggotty's peggotty's affairs affairs into into my my own own hands, hands, with with no no little little pride, pride, i i proved proved the the will, will, and and came came to to a a settlement settlement with with the the legacy legacy duty-office, duty-office, and and took took her her to to the the bank, bank, and and soon soon got got everything everything into into an an orderly orderly train. train. we we varied varied the the legal legal character character of of these these proceedings proceedings by by going going to to see see some some perspiring perspiring wax-work, wax-work, in in fleet fleet street street (melted, (melted, i i should should hope, hope, these these twenty twenty years); years); and and by by visiting visiting miss miss linwood's linwood's exhibition, exhibition, which which i i remember remember as as a a mausoleum mausoleum of of needlework, needlework, favourable favourable to to self-examination self-examination and and repentance; repentance; and and by by inspecting inspecting the the tower tower of of london; london; and and going going to to the the top top of of st. st. paul's. paul's. all all these these wonders wonders afforded afforded peggotty peggotty as as much much pleasure pleasure as as she she was was able able to to enjoy, enjoy, under under existing existing circumstances: circumstances: except, except, i i think, think, st. st. paul's, paul's, which, which, from from her her long long attachment attachment to to her her work-box, work-box, became became a a rival rival of of the the picture picture on on the the lid, lid, and and was, was, in in some some particulars, particulars, vanquished, vanquished, she she considered, considered, by by that that work work of of art. art. peggotty's peggotty's business, business, which which was was what what we we used used to to call call 'common-form 'common-form business' business' in in the the commons commons (and (and very very light light and and lucrative lucrative the the common-form common-form business business was), was), being being settled, settled, i i took took her her down down to to the the office office one one morning morning to to pay pay her her bill. bill. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow had had stepped stepped out, out, old old tiffey tiffey said, said, to to get get a a gentleman gentleman sworn sworn for for a a marriage marriage licence; licence; but but as as i i knew knew he he would would be be back back directly, directly, our our place place lying lying close close to to the the surrogate's, surrogate's, and and to to the the vicar-general's vicar-general's office office too, too, i i told told peggotty peggotty to to wait. wait. we we were were a a little little like like undertakers, undertakers, in in the the commons, commons, as as regarded regarded probate probate transactions; transactions; generally generally making making it it a a rule rule to to look look more more or or less less cut cut up, up, when when we we had had to to deal deal with with clients clients in in mourning. mourning. in in a a similar similar feeling feeling of of delicacy, delicacy, we we were were always always blithe blithe and and light-hearted light-hearted with with the the licence licence clients. clients. therefore therefore i i hinted hinted to to peggotty peggotty that that she she would would find find mr. mr. spenlow spenlow much much recovered recovered from from the the shock shock of of mr. mr. barkis's barkis's decease; decease; and and indeed indeed he he came came in in like like a a bridegroom. bridegroom. but but neither neither peggotty peggotty nor nor i i had had eyes eyes for for him, him, when when we we saw, saw, in in company company with with him, him, mr. mr. murdstone. murdstone. he he was was very very little little changed. changed. his his hair hair looked looked as as thick, thick, and and was was certainly certainly as as black, black, as as ever; ever; and and his his glance glance was was as as little little to to be be trusted trusted as as of of old. old. 'ah, 'ah, copperfield?' copperfield?' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'you know know this this gentleman, gentleman, i i believe?' believe?' i i made made my my gentleman gentleman a a distant distant bow, bow, and and peggotty peggotty barely barely recognized recognized him. him. he he was, was, at at first, first, somewhat somewhat disconcerted disconcerted to to meet meet us us two two together; together; but but quickly quickly decided decided what what to to do, do, and and came came up up to to me. me. 'i 'i hope,' hope,' he he said, said, 'that 'that you are are doing doing well?' well?' 'it 'it can can hardly hardly be be interesting interesting to to you,' said said i. i. 'yes, 'yes, if if you wish wish to to know.' know.' we we looked looked at at each each other, other, and and he he addressed addressed himself himself to to peggotty. peggotty. 'and 'and you,' said said he. he. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to observe observe that that you have have lost lost your your husband.' husband.' 'it's 'it's not not the the first first loss loss i i have have had had in in my my life, life, mr. mr. murdstone,' murdstone,' replied replied peggotty, peggotty, trembling trembling from from head head to to foot. foot. 'i 'i am am glad glad to to hope hope that that there there is is nobody nobody to to blame blame for for this this one, one, -- -- nobody nobody to to answer answer for for it.' it.' 'ha!' 'ha!' said said he; he; 'that's 'that's a a comfortable comfortable reflection. reflection. you have have done done your your duty?' duty?' 'i 'i have have not not worn worn anybody's anybody's life life away,' away,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i am am thankful thankful to to think! think! no, no, mr. mr. murdstone, murdstone, i i have have not not worrited worrited and and frightened frightened any any sweet sweet creetur creetur to to an an early early grave!' grave!' he he eyed eyed her her gloomily gloomily -- -- remorsefully remorsefully i i thought thought -- -- for for an an instant; instant; and and said, said, turning turning his his head head towards towards me, me, but but looking looking at at my my feet feet instead instead of of my my face: face: 'we 'we are are not not likely likely to to encounter encounter soon soon again; again; -- -- a a source source of of satisfaction satisfaction to to us us both, both, no no doubt, doubt, for for such such meetings meetings as as this this can can never never be be agreeable. agreeable. i i do do not not expect expect that that you, who who always always rebelled rebelled against against my my just just authority, authority, exerted exerted for for your your benefit benefit and and reformation, reformation, should should owe owe me me any any good-will good-will now. now. there there is is an an antipathy antipathy between between us us -- -- ' ' 'an 'an old old one, one, i i believe?' believe?' said said i, i, interrupting interrupting him. him. he he smiled, smiled, and and shot shot as as evil evil a a glance glance at at me me as as could could come come from from his his dark dark eyes. eyes. 'it 'it rankled rankled in in your your baby baby breast,' breast,' he he said. said. 'it 'it embittered embittered the the life life of of your your poor poor mother. mother. you are are right. right. i i hope hope you may may do do better, better, yet; yet; i i hope hope you may may correct correct yourself.' yourself.' here here he he ended ended the the dialogue, dialogue, which which had had been been carried carried on on in in a a low low voice, voice, in in a a corner corner of of the the outer outer office, office, by by passing passing into into mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's room, room, and and saying saying aloud, aloud, in in his his smoothest smoothest manner: manner: 'gentlemen 'gentlemen of of mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's profession profession are are accustomed accustomed to to family family differences, differences, and and know know how how complicated complicated and and difficult difficult they they always always are!' are!' with with that, that, he he paid paid the the money money for for his his licence; licence; and, and, receiving receiving it it neatly neatly folded folded from from mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, together together with with a a shake shake of of the the hand, hand, and and a a polite polite wish wish for for his his happiness happiness and and the the lady's, lady's, went went out out of of the the office. office. i i might might have have had had more more difficulty difficulty in in constraining constraining myself myself to to be be silent silent under under his his words, words, if if i i had had had had less less difficulty difficulty in in impressing impressing upon upon peggotty peggotty (who (who was was only only angry angry on on my my account, account, good good creature!) creature!) that that we we were were not not in in a a place place for for recrimination, recrimination, and and that that i i besought besought her her to to hold hold her her peace. peace. she she was was so so unusually unusually roused, roused, that that i i was was glad glad to to compound compound for for an an affectionate affectionate hug, hug, elicited elicited by by this this revival revival in in her her mind mind of of our our old old injuries, injuries, and and to to make make the the best best i i could could of of it, it, before before mr. mr. spenlow spenlow and and the the clerks. clerks. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow did did not not appear appear to to know know what what the the connexion connexion between between mr. mr. murdstone murdstone and and myself myself was; was; which which i i was was glad glad of, of, for for i i could could not not bear bear to to acknowledge acknowledge him, him, even even in in my my own own breast, breast, remembering remembering what what i i did did of of the the history history of of my my poor poor mother. mother. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow seemed seemed to to think, think, if if he he thought thought anything anything about about the the matter, matter, that that my my aunt aunt was was the the leader leader of of the the state state party party in in our our family, family, and and that that there there was was a a rebel rebel party party commanded commanded by by somebody somebody else else -- -- so so i i gathered gathered at at least least from from what what he he said, said, while while we we were were waiting waiting for for mr. mr. tiffey tiffey to to make make out out peggotty's peggotty's bill bill of of costs. costs. 'miss 'miss trotwood,' trotwood,' he he remarked, remarked, 'is 'is very very firm, firm, no no doubt, doubt, and and not not likely likely to to give give way way to to opposition. opposition. i i have have an an admiration admiration for for her her character, character, and and i i may may congratulate congratulate you, copperfield, copperfield, on on being being on on the the right right side. side. differences differences between between relations relations are are much much to to be be deplored deplored -- -- but but they they are are extremely extremely general general -- -- and and the the great great thing thing is, is, to to be be on on the the right right side': side': meaning, meaning, i i take take it, it, on on the the side side of of the the moneyed moneyed interest. interest. 'rather 'rather a a good good marriage marriage this, this, i i believe?' believe?' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. i i explained explained that that i i knew knew nothing nothing about about it. it. 'indeed!' 'indeed!' he he said. said. 'speaking 'speaking from from the the few few words words mr. mr. murdstone murdstone dropped dropped -- -- as as a a man man frequently frequently does does on on these these occasions occasions -- -- and and from from what what miss miss murdstone murdstone let let fall, fall, i i should should say say it it was was rather rather a a good good marriage.' marriage.' 'do 'do you mean mean that that there there is is money, money, sir?' sir?' i i asked. asked. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, 'i 'i understand understand there's there's money. money. beauty beauty too, too, i i am am told.' told.' 'indeed! 'indeed! is is his his new new wife wife young?' young?' 'just 'just of of age,' age,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'so 'so lately, lately, that that i i should should think think they they had had been been waiting waiting for for that.' that.' 'lord 'lord deliver deliver her!' her!' said said peggotty. peggotty. so so very very emphatically emphatically and and unexpectedly, unexpectedly, that that we we were were all all three three discomposed; discomposed; until until tiffey tiffey came came in in with with the the bill. bill. old old tiffey tiffey soon soon appeared, appeared, however, however, and and handed handed it it to to mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, to to look look over. over. mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, settling settling his his chin chin in in his his cravat cravat and and rubbing rubbing it it softly, softly, went went over over the the items items with with a a deprecatory deprecatory air air -- -- as as if if it it were were all all jorkins's jorkins's doing doing -- -- and and handed handed it it back back to to tiffey tiffey with with a a bland bland sigh. sigh. 'yes,' 'yes,' he he said. said. 'that's 'that's right. right. quite quite right. right. i i should should have have been been extremely extremely happy, happy, copperfield, copperfield, to to have have limited limited these these charges charges to to the the actual actual expenditure expenditure out out of of pocket, pocket, but but it it is is an an irksome irksome incident incident in in my my professional professional life, life, that that i i am am not not at at liberty liberty to to consult consult my my own own wishes. wishes. i i have have a a partner partner -- -- mr. mr. jorkins.' jorkins.' as as he he said said this this with with a a gentle gentle melancholy, melancholy, which which was was the the next next thing thing to to making making no no charge charge at at all, all, i i expressed expressed my my acknowledgements acknowledgements on on peggotty's peggotty's behalf, behalf, and and paid paid tiffey tiffey in in banknotes. banknotes. peggotty peggotty then then retired retired to to her her lodging, lodging, and and mr. mr. spenlow spenlow and and i i went went into into court, court, where where we we had had a a divorce-suit divorce-suit coming coming on, on, under under an an ingenious ingenious little little statute statute (repealed (repealed now, now, i i believe, believe, but but in in virtue virtue of of which which i i have have seen seen several several marriages marriages annulled), annulled), of of which which the the merits merits were were these. these. the the husband, husband, whose whose name name was was thomas thomas benjamin, benjamin, had had taken taken out out his his marriage marriage licence licence as as thomas thomas only; only; suppressing suppressing the the benjamin, benjamin, in in case case he he should should not not find find himself himself as as comfortable comfortable as as he he expected. expected. not not finding finding himself himself as as comfortable comfortable as as he he expected, expected, or or being being a a little little fatigued fatigued with with his his wife, wife, poor poor fellow, fellow, he he now now came came forward, forward, by by a a friend, friend, after after being being married married a a year year or or two, two, and and declared declared that that his his name name was was thomas thomas benjamin, benjamin, and and therefore therefore he he was was not not married married at at all. all. which which the the court court confirmed, confirmed, to to his his great great satisfaction. satisfaction. i i must must say say that that i i had had my my doubts doubts about about the the strict strict justice justice of of this, this, and and was was not not even even frightened frightened out out of of them them by by the the bushel bushel of of wheat wheat which which reconciles reconciles all all anomalies. anomalies. but but mr. mr. spenlow spenlow argued argued the the matter matter with with me. me. he he said, said, look look at at the the world, world, there there was was good good and and evil evil in in that; that; look look at at the the ecclesiastical ecclesiastical law, law, there there was was good good and and evil evil in in that. that. it it was was all all part part of of a a system. system. very very good. good. there there you were! were! i i had had not not the the hardihood hardihood to to suggest suggest to to dora's dora's father father that that possibly possibly we we might might even even improve improve the the world world a a little, little, if if we we got got up up early early in in the the morning, morning, and and took took off off our our coats coats to to the the work; work; but but i i confessed confessed that that i i thought thought we we might might improve improve the the commons. commons. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow replied replied that that he he would would particularly particularly advise advise me me to to dismiss dismiss that that idea idea from from my my mind, mind, as as not not being being worthy worthy of of my my gentlemanly gentlemanly character; character; but but that that he he would would be be glad glad to to hear hear from from me me of of what what improvement improvement i i thought thought the the commons commons susceptible? susceptible? taking taking that that part part of of the the commons commons which which happened happened to to be be nearest nearest to to us us -- -- for for our our man man was was unmarried unmarried by by this this time, time, and and we we were were out out of of court, court, and and strolling strolling past past the the prerogative prerogative office office -- -- i i submitted submitted that that i i thought thought the the prerogative prerogative office office rather rather a a queerly queerly managed managed institution. institution. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow inquired inquired in in what what respect? respect? i i replied, replied, with with all all due due deference deference to to his his experience experience (but (but with with more more deference, deference, i i am am afraid, afraid, to to his his being being dora's dora's father), father), that that perhaps perhaps it it was was a a little little nonsensical nonsensical that that the the registry registry of of that that court, court, containing containing the the original original wills wills of of all all persons persons leaving leaving effects effects within within the the immense immense province province of of canterbury, canterbury, for for three three whole whole centuries, centuries, should should be be an an accidental accidental building, building, never never designed designed for for the the purpose, purpose, leased leased by by the the registrars registrars for for their their own own private private emolument, emolument, unsafe, unsafe, not not even even ascertained ascertained to to be be fire-proof, fire-proof, choked choked with with the the important important documents documents it it held, held, and and positively, positively, from from the the roof roof to to the the basement, basement, a a mercenary mercenary speculation speculation of of the the registrars, registrars, who who took took great great fees fees from from the the public, public, and and crammed crammed the the public's public's wills wills away away anyhow anyhow and and anywhere, anywhere, having having no no other other object object than than to to get get rid rid of of them them cheaply. cheaply. that, that, perhaps, perhaps, it it was was a a little little unreasonable unreasonable that that these these registrars registrars in in the the receipt receipt of of profits profits amounting amounting to to eight eight or or nine nine thousand thousand pounds pounds a a year year (to (to say say nothing nothing of of the the profits profits of of the the deputy deputy registrars, registrars, and and clerks clerks of of seats), seats), should should not not be be obliged obliged to to spend spend a a little little of of that that money, money, in in finding finding a a reasonably reasonably safe safe place place for for the the important important documents documents which which all all classes classes of of people people were were compelled compelled to to hand hand over over to to them, them, whether whether they they would would or or no. no. that, that, perhaps, perhaps, it it was was a a little little unjust, unjust, that that all all the the great great offices offices in in this this great great office office should should be be magnificent magnificent sinecures, sinecures, while while the the unfortunate unfortunate working-clerks working-clerks in in the the cold cold dark dark room room upstairs upstairs were were the the worst worst rewarded, rewarded, and and the the least least considered considered men, men, doing doing important important services, services, in in london. london. that that perhaps perhaps it it was was a a little little indecent indecent that that the the principal principal registrar registrar of of all, all, whose whose duty duty it it was was to to find find the the public, public, constantly constantly resorting resorting to to this this place, place, all all needful needful accommodation, accommodation, should should be be an an enormous enormous sinecurist sinecurist in in virtue virtue of of that that post post (and (and might might be, be, besides, besides, a a clergyman, clergyman, a a pluralist, pluralist, the the holder holder of of a a staff staff in in a a cathedral, cathedral, and and what what not), not), -- -- while while the the public public was was put put to to the the inconvenience inconvenience of of which which we we had had a a specimen specimen every every afternoon afternoon when when the the office office was was busy, busy, and and which which we we knew knew to to be be quite quite monstrous. monstrous. that, that, perhaps, perhaps, in in short, short, this this prerogative prerogative office office of of the the diocese diocese of of canterbury canterbury was was altogether altogether such such a a pestilent pestilent job, job, and and such such a a pernicious pernicious absurdity, absurdity, that that but but for for its its being being squeezed squeezed away away in in a a corner corner of of st. st. paul's paul's churchyard, churchyard, which which few few people people knew, knew, it it must must have have been been turned turned completely completely inside inside out, out, and and upside upside down, down, long long ago. ago. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow smiled smiled as as i i became became modestly modestly warm warm on on the the subject, subject, and and then then argued argued this this question question with with me me as as he he had had argued argued the the other. other. he he said, said, what what was was it it after after all? all? it it was was a a question question of of feeling. feeling. if if the the public public felt felt that that their their wills wills were were in in safe safe keeping, keeping, and and took took it it for for granted granted that that the the office office was was not not to to be be made made better, better, who who was was the the worse worse for for it? it? nobody. nobody. who who was was the the better better for for it? it? all all the the sinecurists. sinecurists. very very well. well. then then the the good good predominated. predominated. it it might might not not be be a a perfect perfect system; system; nothing nothing was was perfect; perfect; but but what what he he objected objected to, to, was, was, the the insertion insertion of of the the wedge. wedge. under under the the prerogative prerogative office, office, the the country country had had been been glorious. glorious. insert insert the the wedge wedge into into the the prerogative prerogative office, office, and and the the country country would would cease cease to to be be glorious. glorious. he he considered considered it it the the principle principle of of a a gentleman gentleman to to take take things things as as he he found found them; them; and and he he had had no no doubt doubt the the prerogative prerogative office office would would last last our our time. time. i i deferred deferred to to his his opinion, opinion, though though i i had had great great doubts doubts of of it it myself. myself. i i find find he he was was right, right, however; however; for for it it has has not not only only lasted lasted to to the the present present moment, moment, but but has has done done so so in in the the teeth teeth of of a a great great parliamentary parliamentary report report made made (not (not too too willingly) willingly) eighteen eighteen years years ago, ago, when when all all these these objections objections of of mine mine were were set set forth forth in in detail, detail, and and when when the the existing existing stowage stowage for for wills wills was was described described as as equal equal to to the the accumulation accumulation of of only only two two years years and and a a half half more. more. what what they they have have done done with with them them since; since; whether whether they they have have lost lost many, many, or or whether whether they they sell sell any, any, now now and and then, then, to to the the butter butter shops; shops; i i don't don't know. know. i i am am glad glad mine mine is is not not there, there, and and i i hope hope it it may may not not go go there, there, yet yet awhile. awhile. i i have have set set all all this this down, down, in in my my present present blissful blissful chapter, chapter, because because here here it it comes comes into into its its natural natural place. place. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow and and i i falling falling into into this this conversation, conversation, prolonged prolonged it it and and our our saunter saunter to to and and fro, fro, until until we we diverged diverged into into general general topics. topics. and and so so it it came came about, about, in in the the end, end, that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow told told me me this this day day week week was was dora's dora's birthday, birthday, and and he he would would be be glad glad if if i i would would come come down down and and join join a a little little picnic picnic on on the the occasion. occasion. i i went went out out of of my my senses senses immediately; immediately; became became a a mere mere driveller driveller next next day, day, on on receipt receipt of of a a little little lace-edged lace-edged sheet sheet of of note-paper, note-paper, 'favoured 'favoured by by papa. papa. to to remind'; remind'; and and passed passed the the intervening intervening period period in in a a state state of of dotage. dotage. i i think think i i committed committed every every possible possible absurdity absurdity in in the the way way of of preparation preparation for for this this blessed blessed event. event. i i turn turn hot hot when when i i remember remember the the cravat cravat i i bought. bought. my my boots boots might might be be placed placed in in any any collection collection of of instruments instruments of of torture. torture. i i provided, provided, and and sent sent down down by by the the norwood norwood coach coach the the night night before, before, a a delicate delicate little little hamper, hamper, amounting amounting in in itself, itself, i i thought, thought, almost almost to to a a declaration. declaration. there there were were crackers crackers in in it it with with the the tenderest tenderest mottoes mottoes that that could could be be got got for for money. money. at at six six in in the the morning, morning, i i was was in in covent covent garden garden market, market, buying buying a a bouquet bouquet for for dora. dora. at at ten ten i i was was on on horseback horseback (i (i hired hired a a gallant gallant grey, grey, for for the the occasion), occasion), with with the the bouquet bouquet in in my my hat, hat, to to keep keep it it fresh, fresh, trotting trotting down down to to norwood. norwood. i i suppose suppose that that when when i i saw saw dora dora in in the the garden garden and and pretended pretended not not to to see see her, her, and and rode rode past past the the house house pretending pretending to to be be anxiously anxiously looking looking for for it, it, i i committed committed two two small small fooleries fooleries which which other other young young gentlemen gentlemen in in my my circumstances circumstances might might have have committed committed -- -- because because they they came came so so very very natural natural to to me. me. but but oh! oh! when when i i did did find find the the house, house, and and did did dismount dismount at at the the garden-gate, garden-gate, and and drag drag those those stony-hearted stony-hearted boots boots across across the the lawn lawn to to dora dora sitting sitting on on a a garden-seat garden-seat under under a a lilac lilac tree, tree, what what a a spectacle spectacle she she was, was, upon upon that that beautiful beautiful morning, morning, among among the the butterflies, butterflies, in in a a white white chip chip bonnet bonnet and and a a dress dress of of celestial celestial blue! blue! there there was was a a young young lady lady with with her her -- -- comparatively comparatively stricken stricken in in years years -- -- almost almost twenty, twenty, i i should should say. say. her her name name was was miss miss mills. mills. and and dora dora called called her her julia. julia. she she was was the the bosom bosom friend friend of of dora. dora. happy happy miss miss mills! mills! jip jip was was there, there, and and jip jip would would bark bark at at me me again. again. when when i i presented presented my my bouquet, bouquet, he he gnashed gnashed his his teeth teeth with with jealousy. jealousy. well well he he might. might. if if he he had had the the least least idea idea how how i i adored adored his his mistress, mistress, well well he he might! might! 'oh, 'oh, thank thank you, mr. mr. copperfield! copperfield! what what dear dear flowers!' flowers!' said said dora. dora. i i had had had had an an intention intention of of saying saying (and (and had had been been studying studying the the best best form form of of words words for for three three miles) miles) that that i i thought thought them them beautiful beautiful before before i i saw saw them them so so near near her. her. but but i i couldn't couldn't manage manage it. it. she she was was too too bewildering. bewildering. to to see see her her lay lay the the flowers flowers against against her her little little dimpled dimpled chin, chin, was was to to lose lose all all presence presence of of mind mind and and power power of of language language in in a a feeble feeble ecstasy. ecstasy. i i wonder wonder i i didn't didn't say, say, 'kill 'kill me, me, if if you have have a a heart, heart, miss miss mills. mills. let let me me die die here!' here!' then then dora dora held held my my flowers flowers to to jip jip to to smell. smell. then then jip jip growled, growled, and and wouldn't wouldn't smell smell them. them. then then dora dora laughed, laughed, and and held held them them a a little little closer closer to to jip, jip, to to make make him. him. then then jip jip laid laid hold hold of of a a bit bit of of geranium geranium with with his his teeth, teeth, and and worried worried imaginary imaginary cats cats in in it. it. then then dora dora beat beat him, him, and and pouted, pouted, and and said, said, 'my 'my poor poor beautiful beautiful flowers!' flowers!' as as compassionately, compassionately, i i thought, thought, as as if if jip jip had had laid laid hold hold of of me. me. i i wished wished he he had! had! 'you'll 'you'll be be so so glad glad to to hear, hear, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said dora, dora, 'that 'that that that cross cross miss miss murdstone murdstone is is not not here. here. she she has has gone gone to to her her brother's brother's marriage, marriage, and and will will be be away away at at least least three three weeks. weeks. isn't isn't that that delightful?' delightful?' i i said said i i was was sure sure it it must must be be delightful delightful to to her, her, and and all all that that was was delightful delightful to to her her was was delightful delightful to to me. me. miss miss mills, mills, with with an an air air of of superior superior wisdom wisdom and and benevolence, benevolence, smiled smiled upon upon us. us. 'she 'she is is the the most most disagreeable disagreeable thing thing i i ever ever saw,' saw,' said said dora. dora. 'you can't can't believe believe how how ill-tempered ill-tempered and and shocking shocking she she is, is, julia.' julia.' 'yes, 'yes, i i can, can, my my dear!' dear!' said said julia. julia. 'you can, can, perhaps, perhaps, love,' love,' returned returned dora, dora, with with her her hand hand on on julia's. julia's. 'forgive 'forgive my my not not excepting excepting you, my my dear, dear, at at first.' first.' i i learnt, learnt, from from this, this, that that miss miss mills mills had had had had her her trials trials in in the the course course of of a a chequered chequered existence; existence; and and that that to to these, these, perhaps, perhaps, i i might might refer refer that that wise wise benignity benignity of of manner manner which which i i had had already already noticed. noticed. i i found, found, in in the the course course of of the the day, day, that that this this was was the the case: case: miss miss mills mills having having been been unhappy unhappy in in a a misplaced misplaced affection, affection, and and being being understood understood to to have have retired retired from from the the world world on on her her awful awful stock stock of of experience, experience, but but still still to to take take a a calm calm interest interest in in the the unblighted unblighted hopes hopes and and loves loves of of youth. youth. but but now now mr. mr. spenlow spenlow came came out out of of the the house, house, and and dora dora went went to to him, him, saying, saying, 'look, 'look, papa, papa, what what beautiful beautiful flowers!' flowers!' and and miss miss mills mills smiled smiled thoughtfully, thoughtfully, as as who who should should say, say, 'ye 'ye mayflies, mayflies, enjoy enjoy your your brief brief existence existence in in the the bright bright morning morning of of life!' life!' and and we we all all walked walked from from the the lawn lawn towards towards the the carriage, carriage, which which was was getting getting ready. ready. i i shall shall never never have have such such a a ride ride again. again. i i have have never never had had such such another. another. there there were were only only those those three, three, their their hamper, hamper, my my hamper, hamper, and and the the guitar-case, guitar-case, in in the the phaeton; phaeton; and, and, of of course, course, the the phaeton phaeton was was open; open; and and i i rode rode behind behind it, it, and and dora dora sat sat with with her her back back to to the the horses, horses, looking looking towards towards me. me. she she kept kept the the bouquet bouquet close close to to her her on on the the cushion, cushion, and and wouldn't wouldn't allow allow jip jip to to sit sit on on that that side side of of her her at at all, all, for for fear fear he he should should crush crush it. it. she she often often carried carried it it in in her her hand, hand, often often refreshed refreshed herself herself with with its its fragrance. fragrance. our our eyes eyes at at those those times times often often met; met; and and my my great great astonishment astonishment is is that that i i didn't didn't go go over over the the head head of of my my gallant gallant grey grey into into the the carriage. carriage. there there was was dust, dust, i i believe. believe. there there was was a a good good deal deal of of dust, dust, i i believe. believe. i i have have a a faint faint impression impression that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow remonstrated remonstrated with with me me for for riding riding in in it; it; but but i i knew knew of of none. none. i i was was sensible sensible of of a a mist mist of of love love and and beauty beauty about about dora, dora, but but of of nothing nothing else. else. he he stood stood up up sometimes, sometimes, and and asked asked me me what what i i thought thought of of the the prospect. prospect. i i said said it it was was delightful, delightful, and and i i dare dare say say it it was; was; but but it it was was all all dora dora to to me. me. the the sun sun shone shone dora, dora, and and the the birds birds sang sang dora. dora. the the south south wind wind blew blew dora, dora, and and the the wild wild flowers flowers in in the the hedges hedges were were all all doras, doras, to to a a bud. bud. my my comfort comfort is, is, miss miss mills mills understood understood me. me. miss miss mills mills alone alone could could enter enter into into my my feelings feelings thoroughly. thoroughly. i i don't don't know know how how long long we we were were going, going, and and to to this this hour hour i i know know as as little little where where we we went. went. perhaps perhaps it it was was near near guildford. guildford. perhaps perhaps some some arabian-night arabian-night magician, magician, opened opened up up the the place place for for the the day, day, and and shut shut it it up up for for ever ever when when we we came came away. away. it it was was a a green green spot, spot, on on a a hill, hill, carpeted carpeted with with soft soft turf. turf. there there were were shady shady trees, trees, and and heather, heather, and, and, as as far far as as the the eye eye could could see, see, a a rich rich landscape. landscape. it it was was a a trying trying thing thing to to find find people people here, here, waiting waiting for for us; us; and and my my jealousy, jealousy, even even of of the the ladies, ladies, knew knew no no bounds. bounds. but but all all of of my my own own sex sex -- -- especially especially one one impostor, impostor, three three or or four four years years my my elder, elder, with with a a red red whisker, whisker, on on which which he he established established an an amount amount of of presumption presumption not not to to be be endured endured -- -- were were my my mortal mortal foes. foes. we we all all unpacked unpacked our our baskets, baskets, and and employed employed ourselves ourselves in in getting getting dinner dinner ready. ready. red red whisker whisker pretended pretended he he could could make make a a salad salad (which (which i i don't don't believe), believe), and and obtruded obtruded himself himself on on public public notice. notice. some some of of the the young young ladies ladies washed washed the the lettuces lettuces for for him, him, and and sliced sliced them them under under his his directions. directions. dora dora was was among among these. these. i i felt felt that that fate fate had had pitted pitted me me against against this this man, man, and and one one of of us us must must fall. fall. red red whisker whisker made made his his salad salad (i (i wondered wondered how how they they could could eat eat it. it. nothing nothing should should have have induced induced me me to to touch touch it!) it!) and and voted voted himself himself into into the the charge charge of of the the wine-cellar, wine-cellar, which which he he constructed, constructed, being being an an ingenious ingenious beast, beast, in in the the hollow hollow trunk trunk of of a a tree. tree. by by and and by, by, i i saw saw him, him, with with the the majority majority of of a a lobster lobster on on his his plate, plate, eating eating his his dinner dinner at at the the feet feet of of dora! dora! i i have have but but an an indistinct indistinct idea idea of of what what happened happened for for some some time time after after this this baleful baleful object object presented presented itself itself to to my my view. view. i i was was very very merry, merry, i i know; know; but but it it was was hollow hollow merriment. merriment. i i attached attached myself myself to to a a young young creature creature in in pink, pink, with with little little eyes, eyes, and and flirted flirted with with her her desperately. desperately. she she received received my my attentions attentions with with favour; favour; but but whether whether on on my my account account solely, solely, or or because because she she had had any any designs designs on on red red whisker, whisker, i i can't can't say. say. dora's dora's health health was was drunk. drunk. when when i i drank drank it, it, i i affected affected to to interrupt interrupt my my conversation conversation for for that that purpose, purpose, and and to to resume resume it it immediately immediately afterwards. afterwards. i i caught caught dora's dora's eye eye as as i i bowed bowed to to her, her, and and i i thought thought it it looked looked appealing. appealing. but but it it looked looked at at me me over over the the head head of of red red whisker, whisker, and and i i was was adamant. adamant. the the young young creature creature in in pink pink had had a a mother mother in in green; green; and and i i rather rather think think the the latter latter separated separated us us from from motives motives of of policy. policy. howbeit, howbeit, there there was was a a general general breaking breaking up up of of the the party, party, while while the the remnants remnants of of the the dinner dinner were were being being put put away; away; and and i i strolled strolled off off by by myself myself among among the the trees, trees, in in a a raging raging and and remorseful remorseful state. state. i i was was debating debating whether whether i i should should pretend pretend that that i i was was not not well, well, and and fly fly -- -- i i don't don't know know where where -- -- upon upon my my gallant gallant grey, grey, when when dora dora and and miss miss mills mills met met me. me. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said miss miss mills, mills, 'you are are dull.' dull.' i i begged begged her her pardon. pardon. not not at at all. all. 'and 'and dora,' dora,' said said miss miss mills, mills, 'you are are dull.' dull.' oh oh dear dear no! no! not not in in the the least. least. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield copperfield and and dora,' dora,' said said miss miss mills, mills, with with an an almost almost venerable venerable air. air. 'enough 'enough of of this. this. do do not not allow allow a a trivial trivial misunderstanding misunderstanding to to wither wither the the blossoms blossoms of of spring, spring, which, which, once once put put forth forth and and blighted, blighted, cannot cannot be be renewed. renewed. i i speak,' speak,' said said miss miss mills, mills, 'from 'from experience experience of of the the past past -- -- the the remote, remote, irrevocable irrevocable past. past. the the gushing gushing fountains fountains which which sparkle sparkle in in the the sun, sun, must must not not be be stopped stopped in in mere mere caprice; caprice; the the oasis oasis in in the the desert desert of of sahara sahara must must not not be be plucked plucked up up idly.' idly.' i i hardly hardly knew knew what what i i did, did, i i was was burning burning all all over over to to that that extraordinary extraordinary extent; extent; but but i i took took dora's dora's little little hand hand and and kissed kissed it it -- -- and and she she let let me! me! i i kissed kissed miss miss mills's mills's hand; hand; and and we we all all seemed, seemed, to to my my thinking, thinking, to to go go straight straight up up to to the the seventh seventh heaven. heaven. we we did did not not come come down down again. again. we we stayed stayed up up there there all all the the evening. evening. at at first first we we strayed strayed to to and and fro fro among among the the trees: trees: i i with with dora's dora's shy shy arm arm drawn drawn through through mine: mine: and and heaven heaven knows, knows, folly folly as as it it all all was, was, it it would would have have been been a a happy happy fate fate to to have have been been struck struck immortal immortal with with those those foolish foolish feelings, feelings, and and have have stayed stayed among among the the trees trees for for ever! ever! but, but, much much too too soon, soon, we we heard heard the the others others laughing laughing and and talking, talking, and and calling calling 'where's 'where's dora?' dora?' so so we we went went back, back, and and they they wanted wanted dora dora to to sing. sing. red red whisker whisker would would have have got got the the guitar-case guitar-case out out of of the the carriage, carriage, but but dora dora told told him him nobody nobody knew knew where where it it was, was, but but i. i. so so red red whisker whisker was was done done for for in in a a moment; moment; and and i i got got it, it, and and i i unlocked unlocked it, it, and and i i took took the the guitar guitar out, out, and and i i sat sat by by her, her, and and i i held held her her handkerchief handkerchief and and gloves, gloves, and and i i drank drank in in every every note note of of her her dear dear voice, voice, and and she she sang sang to to me me who who loved loved her, her, and and all all the the others others might might applaud applaud as as much much as as they they liked, liked, but but they they had had nothing nothing to to do do with with it! it! i i was was intoxicated intoxicated with with joy. joy. i i was was afraid afraid it it was was too too happy happy to to be be real, real, and and that that i i should should wake wake in in buckingham buckingham street street presently, presently, and and hear hear mrs. mrs. crupp crupp clinking clinking the the teacups teacups in in getting getting breakfast breakfast ready. ready. but but dora dora sang, sang, and and others others sang, sang, and and miss miss mills mills sang sang -- -- about about the the slumbering slumbering echoes echoes in in the the caverns caverns of of memory; memory; as as if if she she were were a a hundred hundred years years old old -- -- and and the the evening evening came came on; on; and and we we had had tea, tea, with with the the kettle kettle boiling boiling gipsy-fashion; gipsy-fashion; and and i i was was still still as as happy happy as as ever. ever. i i was was happier happier than than ever ever when when the the party party broke broke up, up, and and the the other other people, people, defeated defeated red red whisker whisker and and all, all, went went their their several several ways, ways, and and we we went went ours ours through through the the still still evening evening and and the the dying dying light, light, with with sweet sweet scents scents rising rising up up around around us. us. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow being being a a little little drowsy drowsy after after the the champagne champagne -- -- honour honour to to the the soil soil that that grew grew the the grape, grape, to to the the grape grape that that made made the the wine, wine, to to the the sun sun that that ripened ripened it, it, and and to to the the merchant merchant who who adulterated adulterated it! it! -- -- and and being being fast fast asleep asleep in in a a corner corner of of the the carriage, carriage, i i rode rode by by the the side side and and talked talked to to dora. dora. she she admired admired my my horse horse and and patted patted him him -- -- oh, oh, what what a a dear dear little little hand hand it it looked looked upon upon a a horse! horse! -- -- and and her her shawl shawl would would not not keep keep right, right, and and now now and and then then i i drew drew it it round round her her with with my my arm; arm; and and i i even even fancied fancied that that jip jip began began to to see see how how it it was, was, and and to to understand understand that that he he must must make make up up his his mind mind to to be be friends friends with with me. me. that that sagacious sagacious miss miss mills, mills, too; too; that that amiable, amiable, though though quite quite used used up, up, recluse; recluse; that that little little patriarch patriarch of of something something less less than than twenty, twenty, who who had had done done with with the the world, world, and and mustn't mustn't on on any any account account have have the the slumbering slumbering echoes echoes in in the the caverns caverns of of memory memory awakened; awakened; what what a a kind kind thing thing she she did! did! 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said miss miss mills, mills, 'come 'come to to this this side side of of the the carriage carriage a a moment moment -- -- if if you can can spare spare a a moment. moment. i i want want to to speak speak to to you.' behold behold me, me, on on my my gallant gallant grey, grey, bending bending at at the the side side of of miss miss mills, mills, with with my my hand hand upon upon the the carriage carriage door! door! 'dora 'dora is is coming coming to to stay stay with with me. me. she she is is coming coming home home with with me me the the day day after after tomorrow. tomorrow. if if you would would like like to to call, call, i i am am sure sure papa papa would would be be happy happy to to see see you.' what what could could i i do do but but invoke invoke a a silent silent blessing blessing on on miss miss mills's mills's head, head, and and store store miss miss mills's mills's address address in in the the securest securest corner corner of of my my memory! memory! what what could could i i do do but but tell tell miss miss mills, mills, with with grateful grateful looks looks and and fervent fervent words, words, how how much much i i appreciated appreciated her her good good offices, offices, and and what what an an inestimable inestimable value value i i set set upon upon her her friendship! friendship! then then miss miss mills mills benignantly benignantly dismissed dismissed me, me, saying, saying, 'go 'go back back to to dora!' dora!' and and i i went; went; and and dora dora leaned leaned out out of of the the carriage carriage to to talk talk to to me, me, and and we we talked talked all all the the rest rest of of the the way; way; and and i i rode rode my my gallant gallant grey grey so so close close to to the the wheel wheel that that i i grazed grazed his his near near fore fore leg leg against against it, it, and and 'took 'took the the bark bark off', off', as as his his owner owner told told me, me, 'to 'to the the tune tune of of three three pun' pun' sivin' sivin' -- -- which which i i paid, paid, and and thought thought extremely extremely cheap cheap for for so so much much joy. joy. what what time time miss miss mills mills sat sat looking looking at at the the moon, moon, murmuring murmuring verses verses -- -- and and recalling, recalling, i i suppose, suppose, the the ancient ancient days days when when she she and and earth earth had had anything anything in in common. common. norwood norwood was was many many miles miles too too near, near, and and we we reached reached it it many many hours hours too too soon; soon; but but mr. mr. spenlow spenlow came came to to himself himself a a little little short short of of it, it, and and said, said, 'you must must come come in, in, copperfield, copperfield, and and rest!' rest!' and and i i consenting, consenting, we we had had sandwiches sandwiches and and wine-and-water. wine-and-water. in in the the light light room, room, dora dora blushing blushing looked looked so so lovely, lovely, that that i i could could not not tear tear myself myself away, away, but but sat sat there there staring, staring, in in a a dream, dream, until until the the snoring snoring of of mr. mr. spenlow spenlow inspired inspired me me with with sufficient sufficient consciousness consciousness to to take take my my leave. leave. so so we we parted; parted; i i riding riding all all the the way way to to london london with with the the farewell farewell touch touch of of dora's dora's hand hand still still light light on on mine, mine, recalling recalling every every incident incident and and word word ten ten thousand thousand times; times; lying lying down down in in my my own own bed bed at at last, last, as as enraptured enraptured a a young young noodle noodle as as ever ever was was carried carried out out of of his his five five wits wits by by love. love. when when i i awoke awoke next next morning, morning, i i was was resolute resolute to to declare declare my my passion passion to to dora, dora, and and know know my my fate. fate. happiness happiness or or misery misery was was now now the the question. question. there there was was no no other other question question that that i i knew knew of of in in the the world, world, and and only only dora dora could could give give the the answer answer to to it. it. i i passed passed three three days days in in a a luxury luxury of of wretchedness, wretchedness, torturing torturing myself myself by by putting putting every every conceivable conceivable variety variety of of discouraging discouraging construction construction on on all all that that ever ever had had taken taken place place between between dora dora and and me. me. at at last, last, arrayed arrayed for for the the purpose purpose at at a a vast vast expense, expense, i i went went to to miss miss mills's, mills's, fraught fraught with with a a declaration. declaration. how how many many times times i i went went up up and and down down the the street, street, and and round round the the square square -- -- painfully painfully aware aware of of being being a a much much better better answer answer to to the the old old riddle riddle than than the the original original one one -- -- before before i i could could persuade persuade myself myself to to go go up up the the steps steps and and knock, knock, is is no no matter matter now. now. even even when, when, at at last, last, i i had had knocked, knocked, and and was was waiting waiting at at the the door, door, i i had had some some flurried flurried thought thought of of asking asking if if that that were were mr. mr. blackboy's blackboy's (in (in imitation imitation of of poor poor barkis), barkis), begging begging pardon, pardon, and and retreating. retreating. but but i i kept kept my my ground. ground. mr. mr. mills mills was was not not at at home. home. i i did did not not expect expect he he would would be. be. nobody nobody wanted wanted him. him. miss miss mills mills was was at at home. home. miss miss mills mills would would do. do. i i was was shown shown into into a a room room upstairs, upstairs, where where miss miss mills mills and and dora dora were. were. jip jip was was there. there. miss miss mills mills was was copying copying music music (i (i recollect, recollect, it it was was a a new new song, song, called called 'affection's 'affection's dirge'), dirge'), and and dora dora was was painting painting flowers. flowers. what what were were my my feelings, feelings, when when i i recognized recognized my my own own flowers; flowers; the the identical identical covent covent garden garden market market purchase! purchase! i i cannot cannot say say that that they they were were very very like, like, or or that that they they particularly particularly resembled resembled any any flowers flowers that that have have ever ever come come under under my my observation; observation; but but i i knew knew from from the the paper paper round round them them which which was was accurately accurately copied, copied, what what the the composition composition was. was. miss miss mills mills was was very very glad glad to to see see me, me, and and very very sorry sorry her her papa papa was was not not at at home: home: though though i i thought thought we we all all bore bore that that with with fortitude. fortitude. miss miss mills mills was was conversational conversational for for a a few few minutes, minutes, and and then, then, laying laying down down her her pen pen upon upon 'affection's 'affection's dirge', dirge', got got up, up, and and left left the the room. room. i i began began to to think think i i would would put put it it off off till till tomorrow. tomorrow. 'i 'i hope hope your your poor poor horse horse was was not not tired, tired, when when he he got got home home at at night,' night,' said said dora, dora, lifting lifting up up her her beautiful beautiful eyes. eyes. 'it 'it was was a a long long way way for for him.' him.' i i began began to to think think i i would would do do it it today. today. 'it 'it was was a a long long way way for for him,' him,' said said i, i, 'for 'for he he had had nothing nothing to to uphold uphold him him on on the the journey.' journey.' 'wasn't 'wasn't he he fed, fed, poor poor thing?' thing?' asked asked dora. dora. i i began began to to think think i i would would put put it it off off till till tomorrow. tomorrow. 'ye-yes,' 'ye-yes,' i i said, said, 'he 'he was was well well taken taken care care of. of. i i mean mean he he had had not not the the unutterable unutterable happiness happiness that that i i had had in in being being so so near near you.' dora dora bent bent her her head head over over her her drawing drawing and and said, said, after after a a little little while while -- -- i i had had sat, sat, in in the the interval, interval, in in a a burning burning fever, fever, and and with with my my legs legs in in a a very very rigid rigid state state -- -- 'you didn't didn't seem seem to to be be sensible sensible of of that that happiness happiness yourself, yourself, at at one one time time of of the the day.' day.' i i saw saw now now that that i i was was in in for for it, it, and and it it must must be be done done on on the the spot. spot. 'you didn't didn't care care for for that that happiness happiness in in the the least,' least,' said said dora, dora, slightly slightly raising raising her her eyebrows, eyebrows, and and shaking shaking her her head, head, 'when 'when you were were sitting sitting by by miss miss kitt.' kitt.' kitt, kitt, i i should should observe, observe, was was the the name name of of the the creature creature in in pink, pink, with with the the little little eyes. eyes. 'though 'though certainly certainly i i don't don't know know why why you should,' should,' said said dora, dora, or or why why you should should call call it it a a happiness happiness at at all. all. but but of of course course you don't don't mean mean what what you say. say. and and i i am am sure sure no no one one doubts doubts your your being being at at liberty liberty to to do do whatever whatever you like. like. jip, jip, you naughty naughty boy, boy, come come here!' here!' i i don't don't know know how how i i did did it. it. i i did did it it in in a a moment. moment. i i intercepted intercepted jip. jip. i i had had dora dora in in my my arms. arms. i i was was full full of of eloquence. eloquence. i i never never stopped stopped for for a a word. word. i i told told her her how how i i loved loved her. her. i i told told her her i i should should die die without without her. her. i i told told her her that that i i idolized idolized and and worshipped worshipped her. her. jip jip barked barked madly madly all all the the time. time. when when dora dora hung hung her her head head and and cried, cried, and and trembled, trembled, my my eloquence eloquence increased increased so so much much the the more. more. if if she she would would like like me me to to die die for for her, her, she she had had but but to to say say the the word, word, and and i i was was ready. ready. life life without without dora's dora's love love was was not not a a thing thing to to have have on on any any terms. terms. i i couldn't couldn't bear bear it, it, and and i i wouldn't. wouldn't. i i had had loved loved her her every every minute, minute, day day and and night, night, since since i i first first saw saw her. her. i i loved loved her her at at that that minute minute to to distraction. distraction. i i should should always always love love her, her, every every minute, minute, to to distraction. distraction. lovers lovers had had loved loved before, before, and and lovers lovers would would love love again; again; but but no no lover lover had had loved, loved, might, might, could, could, would, would, or or should should ever ever love, love, as as i i loved loved dora. dora. the the more more i i raved, raved, the the more more jip jip barked. barked. each each of of us, us, in in his his own own way, way, got got more more mad mad every every moment. moment. well, well, well! well! dora dora and and i i were were sitting sitting on on the the sofa sofa by by and and by, by, quiet quiet enough, enough, and and jip jip was was lying lying in in her her lap, lap, winking winking peacefully peacefully at at me. me. it it was was off off my my mind. mind. i i was was in in a a state state of of perfect perfect rapture. rapture. dora dora and and i i were were engaged. engaged. i i suppose suppose we we had had some some notion notion that that this this was was to to end end in in marriage. marriage. we we must must have have had had some, some, because because dora dora stipulated stipulated that that we we were were never never to to be be married married without without her her papa's papa's consent. consent. but, but, in in our our youthful youthful ecstasy, ecstasy, i i don't don't think think that that we we really really looked looked before before us us or or behind behind us; us; or or had had any any aspiration aspiration beyond beyond the the ignorant ignorant present. present. we we were were to to keep keep our our secret secret from from mr. mr. spenlow; spenlow; but but i i am am sure sure the the idea idea never never entered entered my my head, head, then, then, that that there there was was anything anything dishonourable dishonourable in in that. that. miss miss mills mills was was more more than than usually usually pensive pensive when when dora, dora, going going to to find find her, her, brought brought her her back; back; -- -- i i apprehend, apprehend, because because there there was was a a tendency tendency in in what what had had passed passed to to awaken awaken the the slumbering slumbering echoes echoes in in the the caverns caverns of of memory. memory. but but she she gave gave us us her her blessing, blessing, and and the the assurance assurance of of her her lasting lasting friendship, friendship, and and spoke spoke to to us, us, generally, generally, as as became became a a voice voice from from the the cloister. cloister. what what an an idle idle time time it it was! was! what what an an insubstantial, insubstantial, happy, happy, foolish foolish time time it it was! was! when when i i measured measured dora's dora's finger finger for for a a ring ring that that was was to to be be made made of of forget-me-nots, forget-me-nots, and and when when the the jeweller, jeweller, to to whom whom i i took took the the measure, measure, found found me me out, out, and and laughed laughed over over his his order-book, order-book, and and charged charged me me anything anything he he liked liked for for the the pretty pretty little little toy, toy, with with its its blue blue stones stones -- -- so so associated associated in in my my remembrance remembrance with with dora's dora's hand, hand, that that yesterday, yesterday, when when i i saw saw such such another, another, by by chance, chance, on on the the finger finger of of my my own own daughter, daughter, there there was was a a momentary momentary stirring stirring in in my my heart, heart, like like pain! pain! when when i i walked walked about, about, exalted exalted with with my my secret, secret, and and full full of of my my own own interest, interest, and and felt felt the the dignity dignity of of loving loving dora, dora, and and of of being being beloved, beloved, so so much, much, that that if if i i had had walked walked the the air, air, i i could could not not have have been been more more above above the the people people not not so so situated, situated, who who were were creeping creeping on on the the earth! earth! when when we we had had those those meetings meetings in in the the garden garden of of the the square, square, and and sat sat within within the the dingy dingy summer-house, summer-house, so so happy, happy, that that i i love love the the london london sparrows sparrows to to this this hour, hour, for for nothing nothing else, else, and and see see the the plumage plumage of of the the tropics tropics in in their their smoky smoky feathers! feathers! when when we we had had our our first first great great quarrel quarrel (within (within a a week week of of our our betrothal), betrothal), and and when when dora dora sent sent me me back back the the ring, ring, enclosed enclosed in in a a despairing despairing cocked-hat cocked-hat note, note, wherein wherein she she used used the the terrible terrible expression expression that that 'our 'our love love had had begun begun in in folly, folly, and and ended ended in in madness!' madness!' which which dreadful dreadful words words occasioned occasioned me me to to tear tear my my hair, hair, and and cry cry that that all all was was over! over! when, when, under under cover cover of of the the night, night, i i flew flew to to miss miss mills, mills, whom whom i i saw saw by by stealth stealth in in a a back back kitchen kitchen where where there there was was a a mangle, mangle, and and implored implored miss miss mills mills to to interpose interpose between between us us and and avert avert insanity. insanity. when when miss miss mills mills undertook undertook the the office office and and returned returned with with dora, dora, exhorting exhorting us, us, from from the the pulpit pulpit of of her her own own bitter bitter youth, youth, to to mutual mutual concession, concession, and and the the avoidance avoidance of of the the desert desert of of sahara! sahara! when when we we cried, cried, and and made made it it up, up, and and were were so so blest blest again, again, that that the the back back kitchen, kitchen, mangle mangle and and all, all, changed changed to to love's love's own own temple, temple, where where we we arranged arranged a a plan plan of of correspondence correspondence through through miss miss mills, mills, always always to to comprehend comprehend at at least least one one letter letter on on each each side side every every day! day! what what an an idle idle time! time! what what an an insubstantial, insubstantial, happy, happy, foolish foolish time! time! of of all all the the times times of of mine mine that that time time has has in in his his grip, grip, there there is is none none that that in in one one retrospect retrospect i i can can smile smile at at half half so so much, much, and and think think of of half half so so tenderly. tenderly. chapter chapter 34. 34. my my aunt aunt astonishes astonishes me me i i wrote wrote to to agnes agnes as as soon soon as as dora dora and and i i were were engaged. engaged. i i wrote wrote her her a a long long letter, letter, in in which which i i tried tried to to make make her her comprehend comprehend how how blest blest i i was, was, and and what what a a darling darling dora dora was. was. i i entreated entreated agnes agnes not not to to regard regard this this as as a a thoughtless thoughtless passion passion which which could could ever ever yield yield to to any any other, other, or or had had the the least least resemblance resemblance to to the the boyish boyish fancies fancies that that we we used used to to joke joke about. about. i i assured assured her her that that its its profundity profundity was was quite quite unfathomable, unfathomable, and and expressed expressed my my belief belief that that nothing nothing like like it it had had ever ever been been known. known. somehow, somehow, as as i i wrote wrote to to agnes agnes on on a a fine fine evening evening by by my my open open window, window, and and the the remembrance remembrance of of her her clear clear calm calm eyes eyes and and gentle gentle face face came came stealing stealing over over me, me, it it shed shed such such a a peaceful peaceful influence influence upon upon the the hurry hurry and and agitation agitation in in which which i i had had been been living living lately, lately, and and of of which which my my very very happiness happiness partook partook in in some some degree, degree, that that it it soothed soothed me me into into tears. tears. i i remember remember that that i i sat sat resting resting my my head head upon upon my my hand, hand, when when the the letter letter was was half half done, done, cherishing cherishing a a general general fancy fancy as as if if agnes agnes were were one one of of the the elements elements of of my my natural natural home. home. as as if, if, in in the the retirement retirement of of the the house house made made almost almost sacred sacred to to me me by by her her presence, presence, dora dora and and i i must must be be happier happier than than anywhere. anywhere. as as if, if, in in love, love, joy, joy, sorrow, sorrow, hope, hope, or or disappointment; disappointment; in in all all emotions; emotions; my my heart heart turned turned naturally naturally there, there, and and found found its its refuge refuge and and best best friend. friend. of of steerforth steerforth i i said said nothing. nothing. i i only only told told her her there there had had been been sad sad grief grief at at yarmouth, yarmouth, on on account account of of emily's emily's flight; flight; and and that that on on me me it it made made a a double double wound, wound, by by reason reason of of the the circumstances circumstances attending attending it. it. i i knew knew how how quick quick she she always always was was to to divine divine the the truth, truth, and and that that she she would would never never be be the the first first to to breathe breathe his his name. name. to to this this letter, letter, i i received received an an answer answer by by return return of of post. post. as as i i read read it, it, i i seemed seemed to to hear hear agnes agnes speaking speaking to to me. me. it it was was like like her her cordial cordial voice voice in in my my ears. ears. what what can can i i say say more! more! while while i i had had been been away away from from home home lately, lately, traddles traddles had had called called twice twice or or thrice. thrice. finding finding peggotty peggotty within, within, and and being being informed informed by by peggotty peggotty (who (who always always volunteered volunteered that that information information to to whomsoever whomsoever would would receive receive it), it), that that she she was was my my old old nurse, nurse, he he had had established established a a good-humoured good-humoured acquaintance acquaintance with with her, her, and and had had stayed stayed to to have have a a little little chat chat with with her her about about me. me. so so peggotty peggotty said; said; but but i i am am afraid afraid the the chat chat was was all all on on her her own own side, side, and and of of immoderate immoderate length, length, as as she she was was very very difficult difficult indeed indeed to to stop, stop, god god bless bless her! her! when when she she had had me me for for her her theme. theme. this this reminds reminds me, me, not not only only that that i i expected expected traddles traddles on on a a certain certain afternoon afternoon of of his his own own appointing, appointing, which which was was now now come, come, but but that that mrs. mrs. crupp crupp had had resigned resigned everything everything appertaining appertaining to to her her office office (the (the salary salary excepted) excepted) until until peggotty peggotty should should cease cease to to present present herself. herself. mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, after after holding holding divers divers conversations conversations respecting respecting peggotty, peggotty, in in a a very very high-pitched high-pitched voice, voice, on on the the staircase staircase -- -- with with some some invisible invisible familiar familiar it it would would appear, appear, for for corporeally corporeally speaking speaking she she was was quite quite alone alone at at those those times times -- -- addressed addressed a a letter letter to to me, me, developing developing her her views. views. beginning beginning it it with with that that statement statement of of universal universal application, application, which which fitted fitted every every occurrence occurrence of of her her life, life, namely, namely, that that she she was was a a mother mother herself, herself, she she went went on on to to inform inform me me that that she she had had once once seen seen very very different different days, days, but but that that at at all all periods periods of of her her existence existence she she had had had had a a constitutional constitutional objection objection to to spies, spies, intruders, intruders, and and informers. informers. she she named named no no names, names, she she said; said; let let them them the the cap cap fitted, fitted, wear wear it; it; but but spies, spies, intruders, intruders, and and informers, informers, especially especially in in widders' widders' weeds weeds (this (this clause clause was was underlined), underlined), she she had had ever ever accustomed accustomed herself herself to to look look down down upon. upon. if if a a gentleman gentleman was was the the victim victim of of spies, spies, intruders, intruders, and and informers informers (but (but still still naming naming no no names), names), that that was was his his own own pleasure. pleasure. he he had had a a right right to to please please himself; himself; so so let let him him do. do. all all that that she, she, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, stipulated stipulated for, for, was, was, that that she she should should not not be be 'brought 'brought in in contract' contract' with with such such persons. persons. therefore therefore she she begged begged to to be be excused excused from from any any further further attendance attendance on on the the top top set, set, until until things things were were as as they they formerly formerly was, was, and and as as they they could could be be wished wished to to be; be; and and further further mentioned mentioned that that her her little little book book would would be be found found upon upon the the breakfast-table breakfast-table every every saturday saturday morning, morning, when when she she requested requested an an immediate immediate settlement settlement of of the the same, same, with with the the benevolent benevolent view view of of saving saving trouble trouble 'and 'and an an ill-conwenience' ill-conwenience' to to all all parties. parties. after after this, this, mrs. mrs. crupp crupp confined confined herself herself to to making making pitfalls pitfalls on on the the stairs, stairs, principally principally with with pitchers, pitchers, and and endeavouring endeavouring to to delude delude peggotty peggotty into into breaking breaking her her legs. legs. i i found found it it rather rather harassing harassing to to live live in in this this state state of of siege, siege, but but was was too too much much afraid afraid of of mrs. mrs. crupp crupp to to see see any any way way out out of of it. it. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' cried cried traddles, traddles, punctually punctually appearing appearing at at my my door, door, in in spite spite of of all all these these obstacles, obstacles, 'how 'how do do you do?' do?' 'my 'my dear dear traddles,' traddles,' said said i, i, 'i 'i am am delighted delighted to to see see you at at last, last, and and very very sorry sorry i i have have not not been been at at home home before. before. but but i i have have been been so so much much engaged engaged -- -- ' ' 'yes, 'yes, yes, yes, i i know,' know,' said said traddles, traddles, 'of 'of course. course. yours yours lives lives in in london, london, i i think.' think.' 'what 'what did did you say?' say?' 'she 'she -- -- excuse excuse me me -- -- miss miss d., d., you know,' know,' said said traddles, traddles, colouring colouring in in his his great great delicacy, delicacy, 'lives 'lives in in london, london, i i believe?' believe?' 'oh 'oh yes. yes. near near london.' london.' 'mine, 'mine, perhaps perhaps you recollect,' recollect,' said said traddles, traddles, with with a a serious serious look, look, 'lives 'lives down down in in devonshire devonshire -- -- one one of of ten. ten. consequently, consequently, i i am am not not so so much much engaged engaged as as you -- -- in in that that sense.' sense.' 'i 'i wonder wonder you can can bear,' bear,' i i returned, returned, 'to 'to see see her her so so seldom.' seldom.' 'hah!' 'hah!' said said traddles, traddles, thoughtfully. thoughtfully. 'it 'it does does seem seem a a wonder. wonder. i i suppose suppose it it is, is, copperfield, copperfield, because because there there is is no no help help for for it?' it?' 'i 'i suppose suppose so,' so,' i i replied replied with with a a smile, smile, and and not not without without a a blush. blush. 'and 'and because because you have have so so much much constancy constancy and and patience, patience, traddles.' traddles.' 'dear 'dear me!' me!' said said traddles, traddles, considering considering about about it, it, 'do 'do i i strike strike you in in that that way, way, copperfield? copperfield? really really i i didn't didn't know know that that i i had. had. but but she she is is such such an an extraordinarily extraordinarily dear dear girl girl herself, herself, that that it's it's possible possible she she may may have have imparted imparted something something of of those those virtues virtues to to me. me. now now you mention mention it, it, copperfield, copperfield, i i shouldn't shouldn't wonder wonder at at all. all. i i assure assure you she she is is always always forgetting forgetting herself, herself, and and taking taking care care of of the the other other nine.' nine.' 'is 'is she she the the eldest?' eldest?' i i inquired. inquired. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no,' no,' said said traddles. traddles. 'the 'the eldest eldest is is a a beauty.' beauty.' he he saw, saw, i i suppose, suppose, that that i i could could not not help help smiling smiling at at the the simplicity simplicity of of this this reply; reply; and and added, added, with with a a smile smile upon upon his his own own ingenuous ingenuous face: face: 'not, 'not, of of course, course, but but that that my my sophy sophy -- -- pretty pretty name, name, copperfield, copperfield, i i always always think?' think?' 'very 'very pretty!' pretty!' said said i. i. 'not, 'not, of of course, course, but but that that sophy sophy is is beautiful beautiful too too in in my my eyes, eyes, and and would would be be one one of of the the dearest dearest girls girls that that ever ever was, was, in in anybody's anybody's eyes eyes (i (i should should think). think). but but when when i i say say the the eldest eldest is is a a beauty, beauty, i i mean mean she she really really is is a a -- -- ' ' he he seemed seemed to to be be describing describing clouds clouds about about himself, himself, with with both both hands: hands: 'splendid, 'splendid, you know,' know,' said said traddles, traddles, energetically. energetically. 'indeed!' 'indeed!' said said i. i. 'oh, 'oh, i i assure assure you,' said said traddles, traddles, 'something 'something very very uncommon, uncommon, indeed! indeed! then, then, you know, know, being being formed formed for for society society and and admiration, admiration, and and not not being being able able to to enjoy enjoy much much of of it it in in consequence consequence of of their their limited limited means, means, she she naturally naturally gets gets a a little little irritable irritable and and exacting, exacting, sometimes. sometimes. sophy sophy puts puts her her in in good good humour!' humour!' 'is 'is sophy sophy the the youngest?' youngest?' i i hazarded. hazarded. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, no!' no!' said said traddles, traddles, stroking stroking his his chin. chin. 'the 'the two two youngest youngest are are only only nine nine and and ten. ten. sophy sophy educates educates 'em.' 'em.' 'the 'the second second daughter, daughter, perhaps?' perhaps?' i i hazarded. hazarded. 'no,' 'no,' said said traddles. traddles. 'sarah's 'sarah's the the second. second. sarah sarah has has something something the the matter matter with with her her spine, spine, poor poor girl. girl. the the malady malady will will wear wear out out by by and and by, by, the the doctors doctors say, say, but but in in the the meantime meantime she she has has to to lie lie down down for for a a twelvemonth. twelvemonth. sophy sophy nurses nurses her. her. sophy's sophy's the the fourth.' fourth.' 'is 'is the the mother mother living?' living?' i i inquired. inquired. 'oh 'oh yes,' yes,' said said traddles, traddles, 'she 'she is is alive. alive. she she is is a a very very superior superior woman woman indeed, indeed, but but the the damp damp country country is is not not adapted adapted to to her her constitution, constitution, and and -- -- in in fact, fact, she she has has lost lost the the use use of of her her limbs.' limbs.' 'dear 'dear me!' me!' said said i. i. 'very 'very sad, sad, is is it it not?' not?' returned returned traddles. traddles. 'but 'but in in a a merely merely domestic domestic view view it it is is not not so so bad bad as as it it might might be, be, because because sophy sophy takes takes her her place. place. she she is is quite quite as as much much a a mother mother to to her her mother, mother, as as she she is is to to the the other other nine.' nine.' i i felt felt the the greatest greatest admiration admiration for for the the virtues virtues of of this this young young lady; lady; and, and, honestly honestly with with the the view view of of doing doing my my best best to to prevent prevent the the good-nature good-nature of of traddles traddles from from being being imposed imposed upon, upon, to to the the detriment detriment of of their their joint joint prospects prospects in in life, life, inquired inquired how how mr. mr. micawber micawber was? was? 'he 'he is is quite quite well, well, copperfield, copperfield, thank thank you,' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i am am not not living living with with him him at at present.' present.' 'no?' 'no?' 'no. 'no. you see see the the truth truth is,' is,' said said traddles, traddles, in in a a whisper, whisper, 'he 'he had had changed changed his his name name to to mortimer, mortimer, in in consequence consequence of of his his temporary temporary embarrassments; embarrassments; and and he he don't don't come come out out till till after after dark dark -- -- and and then then in in spectacles. spectacles. there there was was an an execution execution put put into into our our house, house, for for rent. rent. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was in in such such a a dreadful dreadful state state that that i i really really couldn't couldn't resist resist giving giving my my name name to to that that second second bill bill we we spoke spoke of of here. here. you may may imagine imagine how how delightful delightful it it was was to to my my feelings, feelings, copperfield, copperfield, to to see see the the matter matter settled settled with with it, it, and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber recover recover her her spirits.' spirits.' 'hum!' 'hum!' said said i. i. 'not 'not that that her her happiness happiness was was of of long long duration,' duration,' pursued pursued traddles, traddles, 'for, 'for, unfortunately, unfortunately, within within a a week week another another execution execution came came in. in. it it broke broke up up the the establishment. establishment. i i have have been been living living in in a a furnished furnished apartment apartment since since then, then, and and the the mortimers mortimers have have been been very very private private indeed. indeed. i i hope hope you won't won't think think it it selfish, selfish, copperfield, copperfield, if if i i mention mention that that the the broker broker carried carried off off my my little little round round table table with with the the marble marble top, top, and and sophy's sophy's flower-pot flower-pot and and stand?' stand?' 'what 'what a a hard hard thing!' thing!' i i exclaimed exclaimed indignantly. indignantly. 'it 'it was was a a -- -- it it was was a a pull,' pull,' said said traddles, traddles, with with his his usual usual wince wince at at that that expression. expression. 'i 'i don't don't mention mention it it reproachfully, reproachfully, however, however, but but with with a a motive. motive. the the fact fact is, is, copperfield, copperfield, i i was was unable unable to to repurchase repurchase them them at at the the time time of of their their seizure; seizure; in in the the first first place, place, because because the the broker, broker, having having an an idea idea that that i i wanted wanted them, them, ran ran the the price price up up to to an an extravagant extravagant extent; extent; and, and, in in the the second second place, place, because because i i -- -- hadn't hadn't any any money. money. now, now, i i have have kept kept my my eye eye since, since, upon upon the the broker's broker's shop,' shop,' said said traddles, traddles, with with a a great great enjoyment enjoyment of of his his mystery, mystery, 'which 'which is is up up at at the the top top of of tottenham tottenham court court road, road, and, and, at at last, last, today today i i find find them them put put out out for for sale. sale. i i have have only only noticed noticed them them from from over over the the way, way, because because if if the the broker broker saw saw me, me, bless bless you, he'd he'd ask ask any any price price for for them! them! what what has has occurred occurred to to me, me, having having now now the the money, money, is, is, that that perhaps perhaps you wouldn't wouldn't object object to to ask ask that that good good nurse nurse of of yours yours to to come come with with me me to to the the shop shop -- -- i i can can show show it it her her from from round round the the corner corner of of the the next next street street -- -- and and make make the the best best bargain bargain for for them, them, as as if if they they were were for for herself, herself, that that she she can!' can!' the the delight delight with with which which traddles traddles propounded propounded this this plan plan to to me, me, and and the the sense sense he he had had of of its its uncommon uncommon artfulness, artfulness, are are among among the the freshest freshest things things in in my my remembrance. remembrance. i i told told him him that that my my old old nurse nurse would would be be delighted delighted to to assist assist him, him, and and that that we we would would all all three three take take the the field field together, together, but but on on one one condition. condition. that that condition condition was, was, that that he he should should make make a a solemn solemn resolution resolution to to grant grant no no more more loans loans of of his his name, name, or or anything anything else, else, to to mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, 'i 'i have have already already done done so, so, because because i i begin begin to to feel feel that that i i have have not not only only been been inconsiderate, inconsiderate, but but that that i i have have been been positively positively unjust unjust to to sophy. sophy. my my word word being being passed passed to to myself, myself, there there is is no no longer longer any any apprehension; apprehension; but but i i pledge pledge it it to to you, too, too, with with the the greatest greatest readiness. readiness. that that first first unlucky unlucky obligation, obligation, i i have have paid. paid. i i have have no no doubt doubt mr. mr. micawber micawber would would have have paid paid it it if if he he could, could, but but he he could could not. not. one one thing thing i i ought ought to to mention, mention, which which i i like like very very much much in in mr. mr. micawber, micawber, copperfield. copperfield. it it refers refers to to the the second second obligation, obligation, which which is is not not yet yet due. due. he he don't don't tell tell me me that that it it is is provided provided for, for, but but he he says says it it will will be. be. now, now, i i think think there there is is something something very very fair fair and and honest honest about about that!' that!' i i was was unwilling unwilling to to damp damp my my good good friend's friend's confidence, confidence, and and therefore therefore assented. assented. after after a a little little further further conversation, conversation, we we went went round round to to the the chandler's chandler's shop, shop, to to enlist enlist peggotty; peggotty; traddles traddles declining declining to to pass pass the the evening evening with with me, me, both both because because he he endured endured the the liveliest liveliest apprehensions apprehensions that that his his property property would would be be bought bought by by somebody somebody else else before before he he could could re-purchase re-purchase it, it, and and because because it it was was the the evening evening he he always always devoted devoted to to writing writing to to the the dearest dearest girl girl in in the the world. world. i i never never shall shall forget forget him him peeping peeping round round the the corner corner of of the the street street in in tottenham tottenham court court road, road, while while peggotty peggotty was was bargaining bargaining for for the the precious precious articles; articles; or or his his agitation agitation when when she she came came slowly slowly towards towards us us after after vainly vainly offering offering a a price, price, and and was was hailed hailed by by the the relenting relenting broker, broker, and and went went back back again. again. the the end end of of the the negotiation negotiation was, was, that that she she bought bought the the property property on on tolerably tolerably easy easy terms, terms, and and traddles traddles was was transported transported with with pleasure. pleasure. 'i 'i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you, indeed,' indeed,' said said traddles, traddles, on on hearing hearing it it was was to to be be sent sent to to where where he he lived, lived, that that night. night. 'if 'if i i might might ask ask one one other other favour, favour, i i hope hope you would would not not think think it it absurd, absurd, copperfield?' copperfield?' i i said said beforehand, beforehand, certainly certainly not. not. 'then 'then if if you would would be be good good enough,' enough,' said said traddles traddles to to peggotty, peggotty, 'to 'to get get the the flower-pot flower-pot now, now, i i think think i i should should like like (it (it being being sophy's, sophy's, copperfield) copperfield) to to carry carry it it home home myself!' myself!' peggotty peggotty was was glad glad to to get get it it for for him, him, and and he he overwhelmed overwhelmed her her with with thanks, thanks, and and went went his his way way up up tottenham tottenham court court road, road, carrying carrying the the flower-pot flower-pot affectionately affectionately in in his his arms, arms, with with one one of of the the most most delighted delighted expressions expressions of of countenance countenance i i ever ever saw. saw. we we then then turned turned back back towards towards my my chambers. chambers. as as the the shops shops had had charms charms for for peggotty peggotty which which i i never never knew knew them them possess possess in in the the same same degree degree for for anybody anybody else, else, i i sauntered sauntered easily easily along, along, amused amused by by her her staring staring in in at at the the windows, windows, and and waiting waiting for for her her as as often often as as she she chose. chose. we we were were thus thus a a good good while while in in getting getting to to the the adelphi. adelphi. on on our our way way upstairs, upstairs, i i called called her her attention attention to to the the sudden sudden disappearance disappearance of of mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's pitfalls, pitfalls, and and also also to to the the prints prints of of recent recent footsteps. footsteps. we we were were both both very very much much surprised, surprised, coming coming higher higher up, up, to to find find my my outer outer door door standing standing open open (which (which i i had had shut) shut) and and to to hear hear voices voices inside. inside. we we looked looked at at one one another, another, without without knowing knowing what what to to make make of of this, this, and and went went into into the the sitting-room. sitting-room. what what was was my my amazement amazement to to find, find, of of all all people people upon upon earth, earth, my my aunt aunt there, there, and and mr. mr. dick! dick! my my aunt aunt sitting sitting on on a a quantity quantity of of luggage, luggage, with with her her two two birds birds before before her, her, and and her her cat cat on on her her knee, knee, like like a a female female robinson robinson crusoe, crusoe, drinking drinking tea. tea. mr. mr. dick dick leaning leaning thoughtfully thoughtfully on on a a great great kite, kite, such such as as we we had had often often been been out out together together to to fly, fly, with with more more luggage luggage piled piled about about him! him! 'my 'my dear dear aunt!' aunt!' cried cried i. i. 'why, 'why, what what an an unexpected unexpected pleasure!' pleasure!' we we cordially cordially embraced; embraced; and and mr. mr. dick dick and and i i cordially cordially shook shook hands; hands; and and mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, who who was was busy busy making making tea, tea, and and could could not not be be too too attentive, attentive, cordially cordially said said she she had had knowed knowed well well as as mr. mr. copperfull copperfull would would have have his his heart heart in in his his mouth, mouth, when when he he see see his his dear dear relations. relations. 'holloa!' 'holloa!' said said my my aunt aunt to to peggotty, peggotty, who who quailed quailed before before her her awful awful presence. presence. 'how 'how are are you?' 'you remember remember my my aunt, aunt, peggotty?' peggotty?' said said i. i. 'for 'for the the love love of of goodness, goodness, child,' child,' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt, aunt, 'don't 'don't call call the the woman woman by by that that south south sea sea island island name! name! if if she she married married and and got got rid rid of of it, it, which which was was the the best best thing thing she she could could do, do, why why don't don't you give give her her the the benefit benefit of of the the change? change? what's what's your your name name now, now, -- -- p?' p?' said said my my aunt, aunt, as as a a compromise compromise for for the the obnoxious obnoxious appellation. appellation. 'barkis, 'barkis, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said peggotty, peggotty, with with a a curtsey. curtsey. 'well! 'well! that's that's human,' human,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'it 'it sounds sounds less less as as if if you wanted wanted a a missionary. missionary. how how d'ye d'ye do, do, barkis? barkis? i i hope hope you're you're well?' well?' encouraged encouraged by by these these gracious gracious words, words, and and by by my my aunt's aunt's extending extending her her hand, hand, barkis barkis came came forward, forward, and and took took the the hand, hand, and and curtseyed curtseyed her her acknowledgements. acknowledgements. 'we 'we are are older older than than we we were, were, i i see,' see,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'we 'we have have only only met met each each other other once once before, before, you know. know. a a nice nice business business we we made made of of it it then! then! trot, trot, my my dear, dear, another another cup.' cup.' i i handed handed it it dutifully dutifully to to my my aunt, aunt, who who was was in in her her usual usual inflexible inflexible state state of of figure; figure; and and ventured ventured a a remonstrance remonstrance with with her her on on the the subject subject of of her her sitting sitting on on a a box. box. 'let 'let me me draw draw the the sofa sofa here, here, or or the the easy-chair, easy-chair, aunt,' aunt,' said said i. i. 'why 'why should should you be be so so uncomfortable?' uncomfortable?' 'thank 'thank you, trot,' trot,' replied replied my my aunt, aunt, 'i 'i prefer prefer to to sit sit upon upon my my property.' property.' here here my my aunt aunt looked looked hard hard at at mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, and and observed, observed, 'we 'we needn't needn't trouble trouble you to to wait, wait, ma'am.' ma'am.' 'shall 'shall i i put put a a little little more more tea tea in in the the pot pot afore afore i i go, go, ma'am?' ma'am?' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'no, 'no, i i thank thank you, ma'am,' ma'am,' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. 'would 'would you let let me me fetch fetch another another pat pat of of butter, butter, ma'am?' ma'am?' said said mrs. mrs. crupp. crupp. 'or 'or would would you be be persuaded persuaded to to try try a a new-laid new-laid hegg? hegg? or or should should i i brile brile a a rasher? rasher? ain't ain't there there nothing nothing i i could could do do for for your your dear dear aunt, aunt, mr. mr. copperfull?' copperfull?' 'nothing, 'nothing, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i shall shall do do very very well, well, i i thank thank you.' mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, who who had had been been incessantly incessantly smiling smiling to to express express sweet sweet temper, temper, and and incessantly incessantly holding holding her her head head on on one one side, side, to to express express a a general general feebleness feebleness of of constitution, constitution, and and incessantly incessantly rubbing rubbing her her hands, hands, to to express express a a desire desire to to be be of of service service to to all all deserving deserving objects, objects, gradually gradually smiled smiled herself, herself, one-sided one-sided herself, herself, and and rubbed rubbed herself, herself, out out of of the the room. room. 'dick!' 'dick!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'you know know what what i i told told you about about time-servers time-servers and and wealth-worshippers?' wealth-worshippers?' mr. mr. dick dick -- -- with with rather rather a a scared scared look, look, as as if if he he had had forgotten forgotten it it -- -- returned returned a a hasty hasty answer answer in in the the affirmative. affirmative. 'mrs. 'mrs. crupp crupp is is one one of of them,' them,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'barkis, 'barkis, i'll i'll trouble trouble you to to look look after after the the tea, tea, and and let let me me have have another another cup, cup, for for i i don't don't fancy fancy that that woman's woman's pouring-out!' pouring-out!' i i knew knew my my aunt aunt sufficiently sufficiently well well to to know know that that she she had had something something of of importance importance on on her her mind, mind, and and that that there there was was far far more more matter matter in in this this arrival arrival than than a a stranger stranger might might have have supposed. supposed. i i noticed noticed how how her her eye eye lighted lighted on on me, me, when when she she thought thought my my attention attention otherwise otherwise occupied; occupied; and and what what a a curious curious process process of of hesitation hesitation appeared appeared to to be be going going on on within within her, her, while while she she preserved preserved her her outward outward stiffness stiffness and and composure. composure. i i began began to to reflect reflect whether whether i i had had done done anything anything to to offend offend her; her; and and my my conscience conscience whispered whispered me me that that i i had had not not yet yet told told her her about about dora. dora. could could it it by by any any means means be be that, that, i i wondered! wondered! as as i i knew knew she she would would only only speak speak in in her her own own good good time, time, i i sat sat down down near near her, her, and and spoke spoke to to the the birds, birds, and and played played with with the the cat, cat, and and was was as as easy easy as as i i could could be. be. but but i i was was very very far far from from being being really really easy; easy; and and i i should should still still have have been been so, so, even even if if mr. mr. dick, dick, leaning leaning over over the the great great kite kite behind behind my my aunt, aunt, had had not not taken taken every every secret secret opportunity opportunity of of shaking shaking his his head head darkly darkly at at me, me, and and pointing pointing at at her. her. 'trot,' 'trot,' said said my my aunt aunt at at last, last, when when she she had had finished finished her her tea, tea, and and carefully carefully smoothed smoothed down down her her dress, dress, and and wiped wiped her her lips lips -- -- 'you needn't needn't go, go, barkis! barkis! -- -- trot, trot, have have you got got to to be be firm firm and and self-reliant?' self-reliant?' 'i 'i hope hope so, so, aunt.' aunt.' 'what 'what do do you think?' think?' inquired inquired miss miss betsey. betsey. 'i 'i think think so, so, aunt.' aunt.' 'then 'then why, why, my my love,' love,' said said my my aunt, aunt, looking looking earnestly earnestly at at me, me, 'why 'why do do you think think i i prefer prefer to to sit sit upon upon this this property property of of mine mine tonight?' tonight?' i i shook shook my my head, head, unable unable to to guess. guess. 'because,' 'because,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'it's 'it's all all i i have. have. because because i'm i'm ruined, ruined, my my dear!' dear!' if if the the house, house, and and every every one one of of us, us, had had tumbled tumbled out out into into the the river river together, together, i i could could hardly hardly have have received received a a greater greater shock. shock. 'dick 'dick knows knows it,' it,' said said my my aunt, aunt, laying laying her her hand hand calmly calmly on on my my shoulder. shoulder. 'i 'i am am ruined, ruined, my my dear dear trot! trot! all all i i have have in in the the world world is is in in this this room, room, except except the the cottage; cottage; and and that that i i have have left left janet janet to to let. let. barkis, barkis, i i want want to to get get a a bed bed for for this this gentleman gentleman tonight. tonight. to to save save expense, expense, perhaps perhaps you can can make make up up something something here here for for myself. myself. anything anything will will do. do. it's it's only only for for tonight. tonight. we'll we'll talk talk about about this, this, more, more, tomorrow.' tomorrow.' i i was was roused roused from from my my amazement, amazement, and and concern concern for for her her -- -- i i am am sure, sure, for for her her -- -- by by her her falling falling on on my my neck, neck, for for a a moment, moment, and and crying crying that that she she only only grieved grieved for for me. me. in in another another moment moment she she suppressed suppressed this this emotion; emotion; and and said said with with an an aspect aspect more more triumphant triumphant than than dejected: dejected: 'we 'we must must meet meet reverses reverses boldly, boldly, and and not not suffer suffer them them to to frighten frighten us, us, my my dear. dear. we we must must learn learn to to act act the the play play out. out. we we must must live live misfortune misfortune down, down, trot!' trot!' chapter chapter 35. 35. depression depression as as soon soon as as i i could could recover recover my my presence presence of of mind, mind, which which quite quite deserted deserted me me in in the the first first overpowering overpowering shock shock of of my my aunt's aunt's intelligence, intelligence, i i proposed proposed to to mr. mr. dick dick to to come come round round to to the the chandler's chandler's shop, shop, and and take take possession possession of of the the bed bed which which mr. mr. peggotty peggotty had had lately lately vacated. vacated. the the chandler's chandler's shop shop being being in in hungerford hungerford market, market, and and hungerford hungerford market market being being a a very very different different place place in in those those days, days, there there was was a a low low wooden wooden colonnade colonnade before before the the door door (not (not very very unlike unlike that that before before the the house house where where the the little little man man and and woman woman used used to to live, live, in in the the old old weather-glass), weather-glass), which which pleased pleased mr. mr. dick dick mightily. mightily. the the glory glory of of lodging lodging over over this this structure structure would would have have compensated compensated him, him, i i dare dare say, say, for for many many inconveniences; inconveniences; but, but, as as there there were were really really few few to to bear, bear, beyond beyond the the compound compound of of flavours flavours i i have have already already mentioned, mentioned, and and perhaps perhaps the the want want of of a a little little more more elbow-room, elbow-room, he he was was perfectly perfectly charmed charmed with with his his accommodation. accommodation. mrs. mrs. crupp crupp had had indignantly indignantly assured assured him him that that there there wasn't wasn't room room to to swing swing a a cat cat there; there; but, but, as as mr. mr. dick dick justly justly observed observed to to me, me, sitting sitting down down on on the the foot foot of of the the bed, bed, nursing nursing his his leg, leg, 'you know, know, trotwood, trotwood, i i don't don't want want to to swing swing a a cat. cat. i i never never do do swing swing a a cat. cat. therefore, therefore, what what does does that that signify signify to to me!' me!' i i tried tried to to ascertain ascertain whether whether mr. mr. dick dick had had any any understanding understanding of of the the causes causes of of this this sudden sudden and and great great change change in in my my aunt's aunt's affairs. affairs. as as i i might might have have expected, expected, he he had had none none at at all. all. the the only only account account he he could could give give of of it it was, was, that that my my aunt aunt had had said said to to him, him, the the day day before before yesterday, yesterday, 'now, 'now, dick, dick, are are you really really and and truly truly the the philosopher philosopher i i take take you for?' for?' that that then then he he had had said, said, yes, yes, he he hoped hoped so. so. that that then then my my aunt aunt had had said, said, 'dick, 'dick, i i am am ruined.' ruined.' that that then then he he had had said, said, 'oh, 'oh, indeed!' indeed!' that that then then my my aunt aunt had had praised praised him him highly, highly, which which he he was was glad glad of. of. and and that that then then they they had had come come to to me, me, and and had had had had bottled bottled porter porter and and sandwiches sandwiches on on the the road. road. mr. mr. dick dick was was so so very very complacent, complacent, sitting sitting on on the the foot foot of of the the bed, bed, nursing nursing his his leg, leg, and and telling telling me me this, this, with with his his eyes eyes wide wide open open and and a a surprised surprised smile, smile, that that i i am am sorry sorry to to say say i i was was provoked provoked into into explaining explaining to to him him that that ruin ruin meant meant distress, distress, want, want, and and starvation; starvation; but but i i was was soon soon bitterly bitterly reproved reproved for for this this harshness, harshness, by by seeing seeing his his face face turn turn pale, pale, and and tears tears course course down down his his lengthened lengthened cheeks, cheeks, while while he he fixed fixed upon upon me me a a look look of of such such unutterable unutterable woe, woe, that that it it might might have have softened softened a a far far harder harder heart heart than than mine. mine. i i took took infinitely infinitely greater greater pains pains to to cheer cheer him him up up again again than than i i had had taken taken to to depress depress him; him; and and i i soon soon understood understood (as (as i i ought ought to to have have known known at at first) first) that that he he had had been been so so confident, confident, merely merely because because of of his his faith faith in in the the wisest wisest and and most most wonderful wonderful of of women, women, and and his his unbounded unbounded reliance reliance on on my my intellectual intellectual resources. resources. the the latter, latter, i i believe, believe, he he considered considered a a match match for for any any kind kind of of disaster disaster not not absolutely absolutely mortal. mortal. 'what 'what can can we we do, do, trotwood?' trotwood?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'there's 'there's the the memorial-' memorial-' 'to 'to be be sure sure there there is,' is,' said said i. i. 'but 'but all all we we can can do do just just now, now, mr. mr. dick, dick, is is to to keep keep a a cheerful cheerful countenance, countenance, and and not not let let my my aunt aunt see see that that we we are are thinking thinking about about it.' it.' he he assented assented to to this this in in the the most most earnest earnest manner; manner; and and implored implored me, me, if if i i should should see see him him wandering wandering an an inch inch out out of of the the right right course, course, to to recall recall him him by by some some of of those those superior superior methods methods which which were were always always at at my my command. command. but but i i regret regret to to state state that that the the fright fright i i had had given given him him proved proved too too much much for for his his best best attempts attempts at at concealment. concealment. all all the the evening evening his his eyes eyes wandered wandered to to my my aunt's aunt's face, face, with with an an expression expression of of the the most most dismal dismal apprehension, apprehension, as as if if he he saw saw her her growing growing thin thin on on the the spot. spot. he he was was conscious conscious of of this, this, and and put put a a constraint constraint upon upon his his head; head; but but his his keeping keeping that that immovable, immovable, and and sitting sitting rolling rolling his his eyes eyes like like a a piece piece of of machinery, machinery, did did not not mend mend the the matter matter at at all. all. i i saw saw him him look look at at the the loaf loaf at at supper supper (which (which happened happened to to be be a a small small one), one), as as if if nothing nothing else else stood stood between between us us and and famine; famine; and and when when my my aunt aunt insisted insisted on on his his making making his his customary customary repast, repast, i i detected detected him him in in the the act act of of pocketing pocketing fragments fragments of of his his bread bread and and cheese; cheese; i i have have no no doubt doubt for for the the purpose purpose of of reviving reviving us us with with those those savings, savings, when when we we should should have have reached reached an an advanced advanced stage stage of of attenuation. attenuation. my my aunt, aunt, on on the the other other hand, hand, was was in in a a composed composed frame frame of of mind, mind, which which was was a a lesson lesson to to all all of of us us -- -- to to me, me, i i am am sure. sure. she she was was extremely extremely gracious gracious to to peggotty, peggotty, except except when when i i inadvertently inadvertently called called her her by by that that name; name; and, and, strange strange as as i i knew knew she she felt felt in in london, london, appeared appeared quite quite at at home. home. she she was was to to have have my my bed, bed, and and i i was was to to lie lie in in the the sitting-room, sitting-room, to to keep keep guard guard over over her. her. she she made made a a great great point point of of being being so so near near the the river, river, in in case case of of a a conflagration; conflagration; and and i i suppose suppose really really did did find find some some satisfaction satisfaction in in that that circumstance. circumstance. 'trot, 'trot, my my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt, aunt, when when she she saw saw me me making making preparations preparations for for compounding compounding her her usual usual night-draught, night-draught, 'no!' 'no!' 'nothing, 'nothing, aunt?' aunt?' 'not 'not wine, wine, my my dear. dear. ale.' ale.' 'but 'but there there is is wine wine here, here, aunt. aunt. and and you always always have have it it made made of of wine.' wine.' 'keep 'keep that, that, in in case case of of sickness,' sickness,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'we 'we mustn't mustn't use use it it carelessly, carelessly, trot. trot. ale ale for for me. me. half half a a pint.' pint.' i i thought thought mr. mr. dick dick would would have have fallen, fallen, insensible. insensible. my my aunt aunt being being resolute, resolute, i i went went out out and and got got the the ale ale myself. myself. as as it it was was growing growing late, late, peggotty peggotty and and mr. mr. dick dick took took that that opportunity opportunity of of repairing repairing to to the the chandler's chandler's shop shop together. together. i i parted parted from from him, him, poor poor fellow, fellow, at at the the corner corner of of the the street, street, with with his his great great kite kite at at his his back, back, a a very very monument monument of of human human misery. misery. my my aunt aunt was was walking walking up up and and down down the the room room when when i i returned, returned, crimping crimping the the borders borders of of her her nightcap nightcap with with her her fingers. fingers. i i warmed warmed the the ale ale and and made made the the toast toast on on the the usual usual infallible infallible principles. principles. when when it it was was ready ready for for her, her, she she was was ready ready for for it, it, with with her her nightcap nightcap on, on, and and the the skirt skirt of of her her gown gown turned turned back back on on her her knees. knees. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt, aunt, after after taking taking a a spoonful spoonful of of it; it; 'it's 'it's a a great great deal deal better better than than wine. wine. not not half half so so bilious.' bilious.' i i suppose suppose i i looked looked doubtful, doubtful, for for she she added: added: 'tut, 'tut, tut, tut, child. child. if if nothing nothing worse worse than than ale ale happens happens to to us, us, we we are are well well off.' off.' 'i 'i should should think think so so myself, myself, aunt, aunt, i i am am sure,' sure,' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, then, then, why why don't don't you think think so?' so?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'because 'because you and and i i are are very very different different people,' people,' i i returned. returned. 'stuff 'stuff and and nonsense, nonsense, trot!' trot!' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. my my aunt aunt went went on on with with a a quiet quiet enjoyment, enjoyment, in in which which there there was was very very little little affectation, affectation, if if any; any; drinking drinking the the warm warm ale ale with with a a tea-spoon, tea-spoon, and and soaking soaking her her strips strips of of toast toast in in it. it. 'trot,' 'trot,' said said she, she, 'i 'i don't don't care care for for strange strange faces faces in in general, general, but but i i rather rather like like that that barkis barkis of of yours, yours, do do you know!' know!' 'it's 'it's better better than than a a hundred hundred pounds pounds to to hear hear you say say so!' so!' said said i. i. 'it's 'it's a a most most extraordinary extraordinary world,' world,' observed observed my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose; nose; 'how 'how that that woman woman ever ever got got into into it it with with that that name, name, is is unaccountable unaccountable to to me. me. it it would would be be much much more more easy easy to to be be born born a a jackson, jackson, or or something something of of that that sort, sort, one one would would think.' think.' 'perhaps 'perhaps she she thinks thinks so, so, too; too; it's it's not not her her fault,' fault,' said said i. i. 'i 'i suppose suppose not,' not,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, rather rather grudging grudging the the admission; admission; 'but 'but it's it's very very aggravating. aggravating. however, however, she's she's barkis barkis now. now. that's that's some some comfort. comfort. barkis barkis is is uncommonly uncommonly fond fond of of you, trot.' trot.' 'there 'there is is nothing nothing she she would would leave leave undone undone to to prove prove it,' it,' said said i. i. 'nothing, 'nothing, i i believe,' believe,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'here, 'here, the the poor poor fool fool has has been been begging begging and and praying praying about about handing handing over over some some of of her her money money -- -- because because she she has has got got too too much much of of it. it. a a simpleton!' simpleton!' my my aunt's aunt's tears tears of of pleasure pleasure were were positively positively trickling trickling down down into into the the warm warm ale. ale. 'she's 'she's the the most most ridiculous ridiculous creature creature that that ever ever was was born,' born,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i knew, knew, from from the the first first moment moment when when i i saw saw her her with with that that poor poor dear dear blessed blessed baby baby of of a a mother mother of of yours, yours, that that she she was was the the most most ridiculous ridiculous of of mortals. mortals. but but there there are are good good points points in in barkis!' barkis!' affecting affecting to to laugh, laugh, she she got got an an opportunity opportunity of of putting putting her her hand hand to to her her eyes. eyes. having having availed availed herself herself of of it, it, she she resumed resumed her her toast toast and and her her discourse discourse together. together. 'ah! 'ah! mercy mercy upon upon us!' us!' sighed sighed my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i know know all all about about it, it, trot! trot! barkis barkis and and myself myself had had quite quite a a gossip gossip while while you were were out out with with dick. dick. i i know know all all about about it. it. i i don't don't know know where where these these wretched wretched girls girls expect expect to to go go to, to, for for my my part. part. i i wonder wonder they they don't don't knock knock out out their their brains brains against against -- -- against against mantelpieces,' mantelpieces,' said said my my aunt; aunt; an an idea idea which which was was probably probably suggested suggested to to her her by by her her contemplation contemplation of of mine. mine. 'poor 'poor emily!' emily!' said said i. i. 'oh, 'oh, don't don't talk talk to to me me about about poor,' poor,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'she 'she should should have have thought thought of of that, that, before before she she caused caused so so much much misery! misery! give give me me a a kiss, kiss, trot. trot. i i am am sorry sorry for for your your early early experience.' experience.' as as i i bent bent forward, forward, she she put put her her tumbler tumbler on on my my knee knee to to detain detain me, me, and and said: said: 'oh, 'oh, trot, trot, trot! trot! and and so so you fancy fancy yourself yourself in in love! love! do do you?' 'fancy, 'fancy, aunt!' aunt!' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, as as red red as as i i could could be. be. 'i 'i adore adore her her with with my my whole whole soul!' soul!' 'dora, 'dora, indeed!' indeed!' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'and 'and you mean mean to to say say the the little little thing thing is is very very fascinating, fascinating, i i suppose?' suppose?' 'my 'my dear dear aunt,' aunt,' i i replied, replied, 'no 'no one one can can form form the the least least idea idea what what she she is!' is!' 'ah! 'ah! and and not not silly?' silly?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'silly, 'silly, aunt!' aunt!' i i seriously seriously believe believe it it had had never never once once entered entered my my head head for for a a single single moment, moment, to to consider consider whether whether she she was was or or not. not. i i resented resented the the idea, idea, of of course; course; but but i i was was in in a a manner manner struck struck by by it, it, as as a a new new one one altogether. altogether. 'not 'not light-headed?' light-headed?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'light-headed, 'light-headed, aunt!' aunt!' i i could could only only repeat repeat this this daring daring speculation speculation with with the the same same kind kind of of feeling feeling with with which which i i had had repeated repeated the the preceding preceding question. question. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i only only ask. ask. i i don't don't depreciate depreciate her. her. poor poor little little couple! couple! and and so so you think think you were were formed formed for for one one another, another, and and are are to to go go through through a a party-supper-table party-supper-table kind kind of of life, life, like like two two pretty pretty pieces pieces of of confectionery, confectionery, do do you, trot?' trot?' she she asked asked me me this this so so kindly, kindly, and and with with such such a a gentle gentle air, air, half half playful playful and and half half sorrowful, sorrowful, that that i i was was quite quite touched. touched. 'we 'we are are young young and and inexperienced, inexperienced, aunt, aunt, i i know,' know,' i i replied; replied; 'and 'and i i dare dare say say we we say say and and think think a a good good deal deal that that is is rather rather foolish. foolish. but but we we love love one one another another truly, truly, i i am am sure. sure. if if i i thought thought dora dora could could ever ever love love anybody anybody else, else, or or cease cease to to love love me; me; or or that that i i could could ever ever love love anybody anybody else, else, or or cease cease to to love love her; her; i i don't don't know know what what i i should should do do -- -- go go out out of of my my mind, mind, i i think!' think!' 'ah, 'ah, trot!' trot!' said said my my aunt, aunt, shaking shaking her her head, head, and and smiling smiling gravely; gravely; 'blind, 'blind, blind, blind, blind!' blind!' 'someone 'someone that that i i know, know, trot,' trot,' my my aunt aunt pursued, pursued, after after a a pause, pause, 'though 'though of of a a very very pliant pliant disposition, disposition, has has an an earnestness earnestness of of affection affection in in him him that that reminds reminds me me of of poor poor baby. baby. earnestness earnestness is is what what that that somebody somebody must must look look for, for, to to sustain sustain him him and and improve improve him, him, trot. trot. deep, deep, downright, downright, faithful faithful earnestness.' earnestness.' 'if 'if you only only knew knew the the earnestness earnestness of of dora, dora, aunt!' aunt!' i i cried. cried. 'oh, 'oh, trot!' trot!' she she said said again; again; 'blind, 'blind, blind!' blind!' and and without without knowing knowing why, why, i i felt felt a a vague vague unhappy unhappy loss loss or or want want of of something something overshadow overshadow me me like like a a cloud. cloud. 'however,' 'however,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'i 'i don't don't want want to to put put two two young young creatures creatures out out of of conceit conceit with with themselves, themselves, or or to to make make them them unhappy; unhappy; so, so, though though it it is is a a girl girl and and boy boy attachment, attachment, and and girl girl and and boy boy attachments attachments very very often often -- -- mind! mind! i i don't don't say say always! always! -- -- come come to to nothing, nothing, still still we'll we'll be be serious serious about about it, it, and and hope hope for for a a prosperous prosperous issue issue one one of of these these days. days. there's there's time time enough enough for for it it to to come come to to anything!' anything!' this this was was not not upon upon the the whole whole very very comforting comforting to to a a rapturous rapturous lover; lover; but but i i was was glad glad to to have have my my aunt aunt in in my my confidence, confidence, and and i i was was mindful mindful of of her her being being fatigued. fatigued. so so i i thanked thanked her her ardently ardently for for this this mark mark of of her her affection, affection, and and for for all all her her other other kindnesses kindnesses towards towards me; me; and and after after a a tender tender good good night, night, she she took took her her nightcap nightcap into into my my bedroom. bedroom. how how miserable miserable i i was, was, when when i i lay lay down! down! how how i i thought thought and and thought thought about about my my being being poor, poor, in in mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's eyes; eyes; about about my my not not being being what what i i thought thought i i was, was, when when i i proposed proposed to to dora; dora; about about the the chivalrous chivalrous necessity necessity of of telling telling dora dora what what my my worldly worldly condition condition was, was, and and releasing releasing her her from from her her engagement engagement if if she she thought thought fit; fit; about about how how i i should should contrive contrive to to live, live, during during the the long long term term of of my my articles, articles, when when i i was was earning earning nothing; nothing; about about doing doing something something to to assist assist my my aunt, aunt, and and seeing seeing no no way way of of doing doing anything; anything; about about coming coming down down to to have have no no money money in in my my pocket, pocket, and and to to wear wear a a shabby shabby coat, coat, and and to to be be able able to to carry carry dora dora no no little little presents, presents, and and to to ride ride no no gallant gallant greys, greys, and and to to show show myself myself in in no no agreeable agreeable light! light! sordid sordid and and selfish selfish as as i i knew knew it it was, was, and and as as i i tortured tortured myself myself by by knowing knowing that that it it was, was, to to let let my my mind mind run run on on my my own own distress distress so so much, much, i i was was so so devoted devoted to to dora dora that that i i could could not not help help it. it. i i knew knew that that it it was was base base in in me me not not to to think think more more of of my my aunt, aunt, and and less less of of myself; myself; but, but, so so far, far, selfishness selfishness was was inseparable inseparable from from dora, dora, and and i i could could not not put put dora dora on on one one side side for for any any mortal mortal creature. creature. how how exceedingly exceedingly miserable miserable i i was, was, that that night! night! as as to to sleep, sleep, i i had had dreams dreams of of poverty poverty in in all all sorts sorts of of shapes, shapes, but but i i seemed seemed to to dream dream without without the the previous previous ceremony ceremony of of going going to to sleep. sleep. now now i i was was ragged, ragged, wanting wanting to to sell sell dora dora matches, matches, six six bundles bundles for for a a halfpenny; halfpenny; now now i i was was at at the the office office in in a a nightgown nightgown and and boots, boots, remonstrated remonstrated with with by by mr. mr. spenlow spenlow on on appearing appearing before before the the clients clients in in that that airy airy attire; attire; now now i i was was hungrily hungrily picking picking up up the the crumbs crumbs that that fell fell from from old old tiffey's tiffey's daily daily biscuit, biscuit, regularly regularly eaten eaten when when st. st. paul's paul's struck struck one; one; now now i i was was hopelessly hopelessly endeavouring endeavouring to to get get a a licence licence to to marry marry dora, dora, having having nothing nothing but but one one of of uriah uriah heep's heep's gloves gloves to to offer offer in in exchange, exchange, which which the the whole whole commons commons rejected; rejected; and and still, still, more more or or less less conscious conscious of of my my own own room, room, i i was was always always tossing tossing about about like like a a distressed distressed ship ship in in a a sea sea of of bed-clothes. bed-clothes. my my aunt aunt was was restless, restless, too, too, for for i i frequently frequently heard heard her her walking walking to to and and fro. fro. two two or or three three times times in in the the course course of of the the night, night, attired attired in in a a long long flannel flannel wrapper wrapper in in which which she she looked looked seven seven feet feet high, high, she she appeared, appeared, like like a a disturbed disturbed ghost, ghost, in in my my room, room, and and came came to to the the side side of of the the sofa sofa on on which which i i lay. lay. on on the the first first occasion occasion i i started started up up in in alarm, alarm, to to learn learn that that she she inferred inferred from from a a particular particular light light in in the the sky, sky, that that westminster westminster abbey abbey was was on on fire; fire; and and to to be be consulted consulted in in reference reference to to the the probability probability of of its its igniting igniting buckingham buckingham street, street, in in case case the the wind wind changed. changed. lying lying still, still, after after that, that, i i found found that that she she sat sat down down near near me, me, whispering whispering to to herself herself 'poor 'poor boy!' boy!' and and then then it it made made me me twenty twenty times times more more wretched, wretched, to to know know how how unselfishly unselfishly mindful mindful she she was was of of me, me, and and how how selfishly selfishly mindful mindful i i was was of of myself. myself. it it was was difficult difficult to to believe believe that that a a night night so so long long to to me, me, could could be be short short to to anybody anybody else. else. this this consideration consideration set set me me thinking thinking and and thinking thinking of of an an imaginary imaginary party party where where people people were were dancing dancing the the hours hours away, away, until until that that became became a a dream dream too, too, and and i i heard heard the the music music incessantly incessantly playing playing one one tune, tune, and and saw saw dora dora incessantly incessantly dancing dancing one one dance, dance, without without taking taking the the least least notice notice of of me. me. the the man man who who had had been been playing playing the the harp harp all all night, night, was was trying trying in in vain vain to to cover cover it it with with an an ordinary-sized ordinary-sized nightcap, nightcap, when when i i awoke; awoke; or or i i should should rather rather say, say, when when i i left left off off trying trying to to go go to to sleep, sleep, and and saw saw the the sun sun shining shining in in through through the the window window at at last. last. there there was was an an old old roman roman bath bath in in those those days days at at the the bottom bottom of of one one of of the the streets streets out out of of the the strand strand -- -- it it may may be be there there still still -- -- in in which which i i have have had had many many a a cold cold plunge. plunge. dressing dressing myself myself as as quietly quietly as as i i could, could, and and leaving leaving peggotty peggotty to to look look after after my my aunt, aunt, i i tumbled tumbled head head foremost foremost into into it, it, and and then then went went for for a a walk walk to to hampstead. hampstead. i i had had a a hope hope that that this this brisk brisk treatment treatment might might freshen freshen my my wits wits a a little; little; and and i i think think it it did did them them good, good, for for i i soon soon came came to to the the conclusion conclusion that that the the first first step step i i ought ought to to take take was, was, to to try try if if my my articles articles could could be be cancelled cancelled and and the the premium premium recovered. recovered. i i got got some some breakfast breakfast on on the the heath, heath, and and walked walked back back to to doctors' doctors' commons, commons, along along the the watered watered roads roads and and through through a a pleasant pleasant smell smell of of summer summer flowers, flowers, growing growing in in gardens gardens and and carried carried into into town town on on hucksters' hucksters' heads, heads, intent intent on on this this first first effort effort to to meet meet our our altered altered circumstances. circumstances. i i arrived arrived at at the the office office so so soon, soon, after after all, all, that that i i had had half half an an hour's hour's loitering loitering about about the the commons, commons, before before old old tiffey, tiffey, who who was was always always first, first, appeared appeared with with his his key. key. then then i i sat sat down down in in my my shady shady corner, corner, looking looking up up at at the the sunlight sunlight on on the the opposite opposite chimney-pots, chimney-pots, and and thinking thinking about about dora; dora; until until mr. mr. spenlow spenlow came came in, in, crisp crisp and and curly. curly. 'how 'how are are you, copperfield?' copperfield?' said said he. he. 'fine 'fine morning!' morning!' 'beautiful 'beautiful morning, morning, sir,' sir,' said said i. i. 'could 'could i i say say a a word word to to you before before you go go into into court?' court?' 'by 'by all all means,' means,' said said he. he. 'come 'come into into my my room.' room.' i i followed followed him him into into his his room, room, and and he he began began putting putting on on his his gown, gown, and and touching touching himself himself up up before before a a little little glass glass he he had, had, hanging hanging inside inside a a closet closet door. door. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to say,' say,' said said i, i, 'that 'that i i have have some some rather rather disheartening disheartening intelligence intelligence from from my my aunt.' aunt.' 'no!' 'no!' said said he. he. 'dear 'dear me! me! not not paralysis, paralysis, i i hope?' hope?' 'it 'it has has no no reference reference to to her her health, health, sir,' sir,' i i replied. replied. 'she 'she has has met met with with some some large large losses. losses. in in fact, fact, she she has has very very little little left, left, indeed.' indeed.' 'you as-tound as-tound me, me, copperfield!' copperfield!' cried cried mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. i i shook shook my my head. head. 'indeed, 'indeed, sir,' sir,' said said i, i, 'her 'her affairs affairs are are so so changed, changed, that that i i wished wished to to ask ask you whether whether it it would would be be possible possible -- -- at at a a sacrifice sacrifice on on our our part part of of some some portion portion of of the the premium, premium, of of course,' course,' i i put put in in this, this, on on the the spur spur of of the the moment, moment, warned warned by by the the blank blank expression expression of of his his face face -- -- 'to 'to cancel cancel my my articles?' articles?' what what it it cost cost me me to to make make this this proposal, proposal, nobody nobody knows. knows. it it was was like like asking, asking, as as a a favour, favour, to to be be sentenced sentenced to to transportation transportation from from dora. dora. 'to 'to cancel cancel your your articles, articles, copperfield? copperfield? cancel?' cancel?' i i explained explained with with tolerable tolerable firmness, firmness, that that i i really really did did not not know know where where my my means means of of subsistence subsistence were were to to come come from, from, unless unless i i could could earn earn them them for for myself. myself. i i had had no no fear fear for for the the future, future, i i said said -- -- and and i i laid laid great great emphasis emphasis on on that, that, as as if if to to imply imply that that i i should should still still be be decidedly decidedly eligible eligible for for a a son-in-law son-in-law one one of of these these days days -- -- but, but, for for the the present, present, i i was was thrown thrown upon upon my my own own resources. resources. 'i 'i am am extremely extremely sorry sorry to to hear hear this, this, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'extremely 'extremely sorry. sorry. it it is is not not usual usual to to cancel cancel articles articles for for any any such such reason. reason. it it is is not not a a professional professional course course of of proceeding. proceeding. it it is is not not a a convenient convenient precedent precedent at at all. all. far far from from it. it. at at the the same same time time -- -- ' ' 'you are are very very good, good, sir,' sir,' i i murmured, murmured, anticipating anticipating a a concession. concession. 'not 'not at at all. all. don't don't mention mention it,' it,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'at 'at the the same same time, time, i i was was going going to to say, say, if if it it had had been been my my lot lot to to have have my my hands hands unfettered unfettered -- -- if if i i had had not not a a partner partner -- -- mr. mr. jorkins jorkins -- -- ' ' my my hopes hopes were were dashed dashed in in a a moment, moment, but but i i made made another another effort. effort. 'do 'do you think, think, sir,' sir,' said said i, i, 'if 'if i i were were to to mention mention it it to to mr. mr. jorkins jorkins -- -- ' ' mr. mr. spenlow spenlow shook shook his his head head discouragingly. discouragingly. 'heaven 'heaven forbid, forbid, copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replied, replied, 'that 'that i i should should do do any any man man an an injustice: injustice: still still less, less, mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. but but i i know know my my partner, partner, copperfield. copperfield. mr. mr. jorkins jorkins is is not not a a man man to to respond respond to to a a proposition proposition of of this this peculiar peculiar nature. nature. mr. mr. jorkins jorkins is is very very difficult difficult to to move move from from the the beaten beaten track. track. you know know what what he he is!' is!' i i am am sure sure i i knew knew nothing nothing about about him, him, except except that that he he had had originally originally been been alone alone in in the the business, business, and and now now lived lived by by himself himself in in a a house house near near montagu montagu square, square, which which was was fearfully fearfully in in want want of of painting; painting; that that he he came came very very late late of of a a day, day, and and went went away away very very early; early; that that he he never never appeared appeared to to be be consulted consulted about about anything; anything; and and that that he he had had a a dingy dingy little little black-hole black-hole of of his his own own upstairs, upstairs, where where no no business business was was ever ever done, done, and and where where there there was was a a yellow yellow old old cartridge-paper cartridge-paper pad pad upon upon his his desk, desk, unsoiled unsoiled by by ink, ink, and and reported reported to to be be twenty twenty years years of of age. age. 'would 'would you object object to to my my mentioning mentioning it it to to him, him, sir?' sir?' i i asked. asked. 'by 'by no no means,' means,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'but 'but i i have have some some experience experience of of mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, copperfield. copperfield. i i wish wish it it were were otherwise, otherwise, for for i i should should be be happy happy to to meet meet your your views views in in any any respect. respect. i i cannot cannot have have the the objection objection to to your your mentioning mentioning it it to to mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, copperfield, copperfield, if if you think think it it worth worth while.' while.' availing availing myself myself of of this this permission, permission, which which was was given given with with a a warm warm shake shake of of the the hand, hand, i i sat sat thinking thinking about about dora, dora, and and looking looking at at the the sunlight sunlight stealing stealing from from the the chimney-pots chimney-pots down down the the wall wall of of the the opposite opposite house, house, until until mr. mr. jorkins jorkins came. came. i i then then went went up up to to mr. mr. jorkins's jorkins's room, room, and and evidently evidently astonished astonished mr. mr. jorkins jorkins very very much much by by making making my my appearance appearance there. there. 'come 'come in, in, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. 'come 'come in!' in!' i i went went in, in, and and sat sat down; down; and and stated stated my my case case to to mr. mr. jorkins jorkins pretty pretty much much as as i i had had stated stated it it to to mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. mr. mr. jorkins jorkins was was not not by by any any means means the the awful awful creature creature one one might might have have expected, expected, but but a a large, large, mild, mild, smooth-faced smooth-faced man man of of sixty, sixty, who who took took so so much much snuff snuff that that there there was was a a tradition tradition in in the the commons commons that that he he lived lived principally principally on on that that stimulant, stimulant, having having little little room room in in his his system system for for any any other other article article of of diet. diet. 'you have have mentioned mentioned this this to to mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, i i suppose?' suppose?' said said mr. mr. jorkins; jorkins; when when he he had had heard heard me, me, very very restlessly, restlessly, to to an an end. end. i i answered answered yes, yes, and and told told him him that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow had had introduced introduced his his name. name. 'he 'he said said i i should should object?' object?' asked asked mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. i i was was obliged obliged to to admit admit that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow had had considered considered it it probable. probable. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to say, say, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i can't can't advance advance your your object,' object,' said said mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, nervously. nervously. 'the 'the fact fact is is -- -- but but i i have have an an appointment appointment at at the the bank, bank, if if you'll you'll have have the the goodness goodness to to excuse excuse me.' me.' with with that that he he rose rose in in a a great great hurry, hurry, and and was was going going out out of of the the room, room, when when i i made made bold bold to to say say that that i i feared, feared, then, then, there there was was no no way way of of arranging arranging the the matter? matter? 'no!' 'no!' said said mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, stopping stopping at at the the door door to to shake shake his his head. head. 'oh, 'oh, no! no! i i object, object, you know,' know,' which which he he said said very very rapidly, rapidly, and and went went out. out. 'you must must be be aware, aware, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' he he added, added, looking looking restlessly restlessly in in at at the the door door again, again, 'if 'if mr. mr. spenlow spenlow objects objects -- -- ' ' 'personally, 'personally, he he does does not not object, object, sir,' sir,' said said i. i. 'oh! 'oh! personally!' personally!' repeated repeated mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, in in an an impatient impatient manner. manner. 'i 'i assure assure you there's there's an an objection, objection, mr. mr. copperfield. copperfield. hopeless! hopeless! what what you wish wish to to be be done, done, can't can't be be done. done. i i -- -- i i really really have have got got an an appointment appointment at at the the bank.' bank.' with with that that he he fairly fairly ran ran away; away; and and to to the the best best of of my my knowledge, knowledge, it it was was three three days days before before he he showed showed himself himself in in the the commons commons again. again. being being very very anxious anxious to to leave leave no no stone stone unturned, unturned, i i waited waited until until mr. mr. spenlow spenlow came came in, in, and and then then described described what what had had passed; passed; giving giving him him to to understand understand that that i i was was not not hopeless hopeless of of his his being being able able to to soften soften the the adamantine adamantine jorkins, jorkins, if if he he would would undertake undertake the the task. task. 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' returned returned mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, with with a a gracious gracious smile, smile, 'you have have not not known known my my partner, partner, mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, as as long long as as i i have. have. nothing nothing is is farther farther from from my my thoughts thoughts than than to to attribute attribute any any degree degree of of artifice artifice to to mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. but but mr. mr. jorkins jorkins has has a a way way of of stating stating his his objections objections which which often often deceives deceives people. people. no, no, copperfield!' copperfield!' shaking shaking his his head. head. 'mr. 'mr. jorkins jorkins is is not not to to be be moved, moved, believe believe me!' me!' i i was was completely completely bewildered bewildered between between mr. mr. spenlow spenlow and and mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, as as to to which which of of them them really really was was the the objecting objecting partner; partner; but but i i saw saw with with sufficient sufficient clearness clearness that that there there was was obduracy obduracy somewhere somewhere in in the the firm, firm, and and that that the the recovery recovery of of my my aunt's aunt's thousand thousand pounds pounds was was out out of of the the question. question. in in a a state state of of despondency, despondency, which which i i remember remember with with anything anything but but satisfaction, satisfaction, for for i i know know it it still still had had too too much much reference reference to to myself myself (though (though always always in in connexion connexion with with dora), dora), i i left left the the office, office, and and went went homeward. homeward. i i was was trying trying to to familiarize familiarize my my mind mind with with the the worst, worst, and and to to present present to to myself myself the the arrangements arrangements we we should should have have to to make make for for the the future future in in their their sternest sternest aspect, aspect, when when a a hackney-chariot hackney-chariot coming coming after after me, me, and and stopping stopping at at my my very very feet, feet, occasioned occasioned me me to to look look up. up. a a fair fair hand hand was was stretched stretched forth forth to to me me from from the the window; window; and and the the face face i i had had never never seen seen without without a a feeling feeling of of serenity serenity and and happiness, happiness, from from the the moment moment when when it it first first turned turned back back on on the the old old oak oak staircase staircase with with the the great great broad broad balustrade, balustrade, and and when when i i associated associated its its softened softened beauty beauty with with the the stained-glass stained-glass window window in in the the church, church, was was smiling smiling on on me. me. 'agnes!' 'agnes!' i i joyfully joyfully exclaimed. exclaimed. 'oh, 'oh, my my dear dear agnes, agnes, of of all all people people in in the the world, world, what what a a pleasure pleasure to to see see you!' 'is 'is it, it, indeed?' indeed?' she she said, said, in in her her cordial cordial voice. voice. 'i 'i want want to to talk talk to to you so so much!' much!' said said i. i. 'it's 'it's such such a a lightening lightening of of my my heart, heart, only only to to look look at at you! if if i i had had had had a a conjuror's conjuror's cap, cap, there there is is no no one one i i should should have have wished wished for for but but you!' 'what?' 'what?' returned returned agnes. agnes. 'well! 'well! perhaps perhaps dora dora first,' first,' i i admitted, admitted, with with a a blush. blush. 'certainly, 'certainly, dora dora first, first, i i hope,' hope,' said said agnes, agnes, laughing. laughing. 'but 'but you next!' next!' said said i. i. 'where 'where are are you going?' going?' she she was was going going to to my my rooms rooms to to see see my my aunt. aunt. the the day day being being very very fine, fine, she she was was glad glad to to come come out out of of the the chariot, chariot, which which smelt smelt (i (i had had my my head head in in it it all all this this time) time) like like a a stable stable put put under under a a cucumber-frame. cucumber-frame. i i dismissed dismissed the the coachman, coachman, and and she she took took my my arm, arm, and and we we walked walked on on together. together. she she was was like like hope hope embodied, embodied, to to me. me. how how different different i i felt felt in in one one short short minute, minute, having having agnes agnes at at my my side! side! my my aunt aunt had had written written her her one one of of the the odd, odd, abrupt abrupt notes notes -- -- very very little little longer longer than than a a bank bank note note -- -- to to which which her her epistolary epistolary efforts efforts were were usually usually limited. limited. she she had had stated stated therein therein that that she she had had fallen fallen into into adversity, adversity, and and was was leaving leaving dover dover for for good, good, but but had had quite quite made made up up her her mind mind to to it, it, and and was was so so well well that that nobody nobody need need be be uncomfortable uncomfortable about about her. her. agnes agnes had had come come to to london london to to see see my my aunt, aunt, between between whom whom and and herself herself there there had had been been a a mutual mutual liking liking these these many many years: years: indeed, indeed, it it dated dated from from the the time time of of my my taking taking up up my my residence residence in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's house. house. she she was was not not alone, alone, she she said. said. her her papa papa was was with with her her -- -- and and uriah uriah heep. heep. 'and 'and now now they they are are partners,' partners,' said said i. i. 'confound 'confound him!' him!' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said agnes. agnes. 'they 'they have have some some business business here; here; and and i i took took advantage advantage of of their their coming, coming, to to come come too. too. you must must not not think think my my visit visit all all friendly friendly and and disinterested, disinterested, trotwood, trotwood, for for -- -- i i am am afraid afraid i i may may be be cruelly cruelly prejudiced prejudiced -- -- i i do do not not like like to to let let papa papa go go away away alone, alone, with with him.' him.' 'does 'does he he exercise exercise the the same same influence influence over over mr. mr. wickfield wickfield still, still, agnes?' agnes?' agnes agnes shook shook her her head. head. 'there 'there is is such such a a change change at at home,' home,' said said she, she, 'that 'that you would would scarcely scarcely know know the the dear dear old old house. house. they they live live with with us us now.' now.' 'they?' 'they?' said said i. i. 'mr. 'mr. heep heep and and his his mother. mother. he he sleeps sleeps in in your your old old room,' room,' said said agnes, agnes, looking looking up up into into my my face. face. 'i 'i wish wish i i had had the the ordering ordering of of his his dreams,' dreams,' said said i. i. 'he 'he wouldn't wouldn't sleep sleep there there long.' long.' 'i 'i keep keep my my own own little little room,' room,' said said agnes, agnes, 'where 'where i i used used to to learn learn my my lessons. lessons. how how the the time time goes! goes! you remember? remember? the the little little panelled panelled room room that that opens opens from from the the drawing-room?' drawing-room?' 'remember, 'remember, agnes? agnes? when when i i saw saw you, for for the the first first time, time, coming coming out out at at the the door, door, with with your your quaint quaint little little basket basket of of keys keys hanging hanging at at your your side?' side?' 'it 'it is is just just the the same,' same,' said said agnes, agnes, smiling. smiling. 'i 'i am am glad glad you think think of of it it so so pleasantly. pleasantly. we we were were very very happy.' happy.' 'we 'we were, were, indeed,' indeed,' said said i. i. 'i 'i keep keep that that room room to to myself myself still; still; but but i i cannot cannot always always desert desert mrs. mrs. heep, heep, you know. know. and and so,' so,' said said agnes, agnes, quietly, quietly, 'i 'i feel feel obliged obliged to to bear bear her her company, company, when when i i might might prefer prefer to to be be alone. alone. but but i i have have no no other other reason reason to to complain complain of of her. her. if if she she tires tires me, me, sometimes, sometimes, by by her her praises praises of of her her son, son, it it is is only only natural natural in in a a mother. mother. he he is is a a very very good good son son to to her.' her.' i i looked looked at at agnes agnes when when she she said said these these words, words, without without detecting detecting in in her her any any consciousness consciousness of of uriah's uriah's design. design. her her mild mild but but earnest earnest eyes eyes met met mine mine with with their their own own beautiful beautiful frankness, frankness, and and there there was was no no change change in in her her gentle gentle face. face. 'the 'the chief chief evil evil of of their their presence presence in in the the house,' house,' said said agnes, agnes, 'is 'is that that i i cannot cannot be be as as near near papa papa as as i i could could wish wish -- -- uriah uriah heep heep being being so so much much between between us us -- -- and and cannot cannot watch watch over over him, him, if if that that is is not not too too bold bold a a thing thing to to say, say, as as closely closely as as i i would. would. but but if if any any fraud fraud or or treachery treachery is is practising practising against against him, him, i i hope hope that that simple simple love love and and truth truth will will be be strong strong in in the the end. end. i i hope hope that that real real love love and and truth truth are are stronger stronger in in the the end end than than any any evil evil or or misfortune misfortune in in the the world.' world.' a a certain certain bright bright smile, smile, which which i i never never saw saw on on any any other other face, face, died died away, away, even even while while i i thought thought how how good good it it was, was, and and how how familiar familiar it it had had once once been been to to me; me; and and she she asked asked me, me, with with a a quick quick change change of of expression expression (we (we were were drawing drawing very very near near my my street), street), if if i i knew knew how how the the reverse reverse in in my my aunt's aunt's circumstances circumstances had had been been brought brought about. about. on on my my replying replying no, no, she she had had not not told told me me yet, yet, agnes agnes became became thoughtful, thoughtful, and and i i fancied fancied i i felt felt her her arm arm tremble tremble in in mine. mine. we we found found my my aunt aunt alone, alone, in in a a state state of of some some excitement. excitement. a a difference difference of of opinion opinion had had arisen arisen between between herself herself and and mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, on on an an abstract abstract question question (the (the propriety propriety of of chambers chambers being being inhabited inhabited by by the the gentler gentler sex); sex); and and my my aunt, aunt, utterly utterly indifferent indifferent to to spasms spasms on on the the part part of of mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, had had cut cut the the dispute dispute short, short, by by informing informing that that lady lady that that she she smelt smelt of of my my brandy, brandy, and and that that she she would would trouble trouble her her to to walk walk out. out. both both of of these these expressions expressions mrs. mrs. crupp crupp considered considered actionable, actionable, and and had had expressed expressed her her intention intention of of bringing bringing before before a a 'british 'british judy' judy' -- -- meaning, meaning, it it was was supposed, supposed, the the bulwark bulwark of of our our national national liberties. liberties. my my aunt, aunt, however, however, having having had had time time to to cool, cool, while while peggotty peggotty was was out out showing showing mr. mr. dick dick the the soldiers soldiers at at the the horse horse guards guards -- -- and and being, being, besides, besides, greatly greatly pleased pleased to to see see agnes agnes -- -- rather rather plumed plumed herself herself on on the the affair affair than than otherwise, otherwise, and and received received us us with with unimpaired unimpaired good good humour. humour. when when agnes agnes laid laid her her bonnet bonnet on on the the table, table, and and sat sat down down beside beside her, her, i i could could not not but but think, think, looking looking on on her her mild mild eyes eyes and and her her radiant radiant forehead, forehead, how how natural natural it it seemed seemed to to have have her her there; there; how how trustfully, trustfully, although although she she was was so so young young and and inexperienced, inexperienced, my my aunt aunt confided confided in in her; her; how how strong strong she she was, was, indeed, indeed, in in simple simple love love and and truth. truth. we we began began to to talk talk about about my my aunt's aunt's losses, losses, and and i i told told them them what what i i had had tried tried to to do do that that morning. morning. 'which 'which was was injudicious, injudicious, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'but 'but well well meant. meant. you are are a a generous generous boy boy -- -- i i suppose suppose i i must must say, say, young young man, man, now now -- -- and and i i am am proud proud of of you, my my dear. dear. so so far, far, so so good. good. now, now, trot trot and and agnes, agnes, let let us us look look the the case case of of betsey betsey trotwood trotwood in in the the face, face, and and see see how how it it stands.' stands.' i i observed observed agnes agnes turn turn pale, pale, as as she she looked looked very very attentively attentively at at my my aunt. aunt. my my aunt, aunt, patting patting her her cat, cat, looked looked very very attentively attentively at at agnes. agnes. 'betsey 'betsey trotwood,' trotwood,' said said my my aunt, aunt, who who had had always always kept kept her her money money matters matters to to herself. herself. ' ' -- -- i i don't don't mean mean your your sister, sister, trot, trot, my my dear, dear, but but myself myself -- -- had had a a certain certain property. property. it it don't don't matter matter how how much; much; enough enough to to live live on. on. more; more; for for she she had had saved saved a a little, little, and and added added to to it. it. betsey betsey funded funded her her property property for for some some time, time, and and then, then, by by the the advice advice of of her her man man of of business, business, laid laid it it out out on on landed landed security. security. that that did did very very well, well, and and returned returned very very good good interest, interest, till till betsey betsey was was paid paid off. off. i i am am talking talking of of betsey betsey as as if if she she was was a a man-of-war. man-of-war. well! well! then, then, betsey betsey had had to to look look about about her, her, for for a a new new investment. investment. she she thought thought she she was was wiser, wiser, now, now, than than her her man man of of business, business, who who was was not not such such a a good good man man of of business business by by this this time, time, as as he he used used to to be be -- -- i i am am alluding alluding to to your your father, father, agnes agnes -- -- and and she she took took it it into into her her head head to to lay lay it it out out for for herself. herself. so so she she took took her her pigs,' pigs,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'to 'to a a foreign foreign market; market; and and a a very very bad bad market market it it turned turned out out to to be. be. first, first, she she lost lost in in the the mining mining way, way, and and then then she she lost lost in in the the diving diving way way -- -- fishing fishing up up treasure, treasure, or or some some such such tom tom tiddler tiddler nonsense,' nonsense,' explained explained my my aunt, aunt, rubbing rubbing her her nose; nose; 'and 'and then then she she lost lost in in the the mining mining way way again, again, and, and, last last of of all, all, to to set set the the thing thing entirely entirely to to rights, rights, she she lost lost in in the the banking banking way. way. i i don't don't know know what what the the bank bank shares shares were were worth worth for for a a little little while,' while,' said said my my aunt; aunt; 'cent 'cent per per cent cent was was the the lowest lowest of of it, it, i i believe; believe; but but the the bank bank was was at at the the other other end end of of the the world, world, and and tumbled tumbled into into space, space, for for what what i i know; know; anyhow, anyhow, it it fell fell to to pieces, pieces, and and never never will will and and never never can can pay pay sixpence; sixpence; and and betsey's betsey's sixpences sixpences were were all all there, there, and and there's there's an an end end of of them. them. least least said, said, soonest soonest mended!' mended!' my my aunt aunt concluded concluded this this philosophical philosophical summary, summary, by by fixing fixing her her eyes eyes with with a a kind kind of of triumph triumph on on agnes, agnes, whose whose colour colour was was gradually gradually returning. returning. 'dear 'dear miss miss trotwood, trotwood, is is that that all all the the history?' history?' said said agnes. agnes. 'i 'i hope hope it's it's enough, enough, child,' child,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'if 'if there there had had been been more more money money to to lose, lose, it it wouldn't wouldn't have have been been all, all, i i dare dare say. say. betsey betsey would would have have contrived contrived to to throw throw that that after after the the rest, rest, and and make make another another chapter, chapter, i i have have little little doubt. doubt. but but there there was was no no more more money, money, and and there's there's no no more more story.' story.' agnes agnes had had listened listened at at first first with with suspended suspended breath. breath. her her colour colour still still came came and and went, went, but but she she breathed breathed more more freely. freely. i i thought thought i i knew knew why. why. i i thought thought she she had had had had some some fear fear that that her her unhappy unhappy father father might might be be in in some some way way to to blame blame for for what what had had happened. happened. my my aunt aunt took took her her hand hand in in hers, hers, and and laughed. laughed. 'is 'is that that all?' all?' repeated repeated my my aunt. aunt. 'why, 'why, yes, yes, that's that's all, all, except, except, "and "and she she lived lived happy happy ever ever afterwards." afterwards." perhaps perhaps i i may may add add that that of of betsey betsey yet, yet, one one of of these these days. days. now, now, agnes, agnes, you have have a a wise wise head. head. so so have have you, trot, trot, in in some some things, things, though though i i can't can't compliment compliment you always'; always'; and and here here my my aunt aunt shook shook her her own own at at me, me, with with an an energy energy peculiar peculiar to to herself. herself. 'what's 'what's to to be be done? done? here's here's the the cottage, cottage, taking taking one one time time with with another, another, will will produce produce say say seventy seventy pounds pounds a a year. year. i i think think we we may may safely safely put put it it down down at at that. that. well! well! -- -- that's that's all all we've we've got,' got,' said said my my aunt; aunt; with with whom whom it it was was an an idiosyncrasy, idiosyncrasy, as as it it is is with with some some horses, horses, to to stop stop very very short short when when she she appeared appeared to to be be in in a a fair fair way way of of going going on on for for a a long long while. while. 'then,' 'then,' said said my my aunt, aunt, after after a a rest, rest, 'there's 'there's dick. dick. he's he's good good for for a a hundred hundred a-year, a-year, but but of of course course that that must must be be expended expended on on himself. himself. i i would would sooner sooner send send him him away, away, though though i i know know i i am am the the only only person person who who appreciates appreciates him, him, than than have have him, him, and and not not spend spend his his money money on on himself. himself. how how can can trot trot and and i i do do best, best, upon upon our our means? means? what what do do you say, say, agnes?' agnes?' 'i 'i say, say, aunt,' aunt,' i i interposed, interposed, 'that 'that i i must must do do something!' something!' 'go 'go for for a a soldier, soldier, do do you mean?' mean?' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, alarmed; alarmed; 'or 'or go go to to sea? sea? i i won't won't hear hear of of it. it. you are are to to be be a a proctor. proctor. we're we're not not going going to to have have any any knockings knockings on on the the head head in in this this family, family, if if you please, please, sir.' sir.' i i was was about about to to explain explain that that i i was was not not desirous desirous of of introducing introducing that that mode mode of of provision provision into into the the family, family, when when agnes agnes inquired inquired if if my my rooms rooms were were held held for for any any long long term? term? 'you come come to to the the point, point, my my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'they 'they are are not not to to be be got got rid rid of, of, for for six six months months at at least, least, unless unless they they could could be be underlet, underlet, and and that that i i don't don't believe. believe. the the last last man man died died here. here. five five people people out out of of six six would would die die -- -- of of course course -- -- of of that that woman woman in in nankeen nankeen with with the the flannel flannel petticoat. petticoat. i i have have a a little little ready ready money; money; and and i i agree agree with with you, the the best best thing thing we we can can do, do, is, is, to to live live the the term term out out here, here, and and get get a a bedroom bedroom hard hard by.' by.' i i thought thought it it my my duty duty to to hint hint at at the the discomfort discomfort my my aunt aunt would would sustain, sustain, from from living living in in a a continual continual state state of of guerilla guerilla warfare warfare with with mrs. mrs. crupp; crupp; but but she she disposed disposed of of that that objection objection summarily summarily by by declaring declaring that, that, on on the the first first demonstration demonstration of of hostilities, hostilities, she she was was prepared prepared to to astonish astonish mrs. mrs. crupp crupp for for the the whole whole remainder remainder of of her her natural natural life. life. 'i 'i have have been been thinking, thinking, trotwood,' trotwood,' said said agnes, agnes, diffidently, diffidently, 'that 'that if if you had had time time -- -- ' ' 'i 'i have have a a good good deal deal of of time, time, agnes. agnes. i i am am always always disengaged disengaged after after four four or or five five o'clock, o'clock, and and i i have have time time early early in in the the morning. morning. in in one one way way and and another,' another,' said said i, i, conscious conscious of of reddening reddening a a little little as as i i thought thought of of the the hours hours and and hours hours i i had had devoted devoted to to fagging fagging about about town, town, and and to to and and fro fro upon upon the the norwood norwood road, road, 'i 'i have have abundance abundance of of time.' time.' 'i 'i know know you would would not not mind,' mind,' said said agnes, agnes, coming coming to to me, me, and and speaking speaking in in a a low low voice, voice, so so full full of of sweet sweet and and hopeful hopeful consideration consideration that that i i hear hear it it now, now, 'the 'the duties duties of of a a secretary.' secretary.' 'mind, 'mind, my my dear dear agnes?' agnes?' 'because,' 'because,' continued continued agnes, agnes, 'doctor 'doctor strong strong has has acted acted on on his his intention intention of of retiring, retiring, and and has has come come to to live live in in london; london; and and he he asked asked papa, papa, i i know, know, if if he he could could recommend recommend him him one. one. don't don't you think think he he would would rather rather have have his his favourite favourite old old pupil pupil near near him, him, than than anybody anybody else?' else?' 'dear 'dear agnes!' agnes!' said said i. i. 'what 'what should should i i do do without without you! you are are always always my my good good angel. angel. i i told told you so. so. i i never never think think of of you in in any any other other light.' light.' agnes agnes answered answered with with her her pleasant pleasant laugh, laugh, that that one one good good angel angel (meaning (meaning dora) dora) was was enough; enough; and and went went on on to to remind remind me me that that the the doctor doctor had had been been used used to to occupy occupy himself himself in in his his study, study, early early in in the the morning, morning, and and in in the the evening evening -- -- and and that that probably probably my my leisure leisure would would suit suit his his requirements requirements very very well. well. i i was was scarcely scarcely more more delighted delighted with with the the prospect prospect of of earning earning my my own own bread, bread, than than with with the the hope hope of of earning earning it it under under my my old old master; master; in in short, short, acting acting on on the the advice advice of of agnes, agnes, i i sat sat down down and and wrote wrote a a letter letter to to the the doctor, doctor, stating stating my my object, object, and and appointing appointing to to call call on on him him next next day day at at ten ten in in the the forenoon. forenoon. this this i i addressed addressed to to highgate highgate -- -- for for in in that that place, place, so so memorable memorable to to me, me, he he lived lived -- -- and and went went and and posted, posted, myself, myself, without without losing losing a a minute. minute. wherever wherever agnes agnes was, was, some some agreeable agreeable token token of of her her noiseless noiseless presence presence seemed seemed inseparable inseparable from from the the place. place. when when i i came came back, back, i i found found my my aunt's aunt's birds birds hanging, hanging, just just as as they they had had hung hung so so long long in in the the parlour parlour window window of of the the cottage; cottage; and and my my easy-chair easy-chair imitating imitating my my aunt's aunt's much much easier easier chair chair in in its its position position at at the the open open window; window; and and even even the the round round green green fan, fan, which which my my aunt aunt had had brought brought away away with with her, her, screwed screwed on on to to the the window-sill. window-sill. i i knew knew who who had had done done all all this, this, by by its its seeming seeming to to have have quietly quietly done done itself; itself; and and i i should should have have known known in in a a moment moment who who had had arranged arranged my my neglected neglected books books in in the the old old order order of of my my school school days, days, even even if if i i had had supposed supposed agnes agnes to to be be miles miles away, away, instead instead of of seeing seeing her her busy busy with with them, them, and and smiling smiling at at the the disorder disorder into into which which they they had had fallen. fallen. my my aunt aunt was was quite quite gracious gracious on on the the subject subject of of the the thames thames (it (it really really did did look look very very well well with with the the sun sun upon upon it, it, though though not not like like the the sea sea before before the the cottage), cottage), but but she she could could not not relent relent towards towards the the london london smoke, smoke, which, which, she she said, said, 'peppered 'peppered everything'. everything'. a a complete complete revolution, revolution, in in which which peggotty peggotty bore bore a a prominent prominent part, part, was was being being effected effected in in every every corner corner of of my my rooms, rooms, in in regard regard of of this this pepper; pepper; and and i i was was looking looking on, on, thinking thinking how how little little even even peggotty peggotty seemed seemed to to do do with with a a good good deal deal of of bustle, bustle, and and how how much much agnes agnes did did without without any any bustle bustle at at all, all, when when a a knock knock came came at at the the door. door. 'i 'i think,' think,' said said agnes, agnes, turning turning pale, pale, 'it's 'it's papa. papa. he he promised promised me me that that he he would would come.' come.' i i opened opened the the door, door, and and admitted, admitted, not not only only mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, but but uriah uriah heep. heep. i i had had not not seen seen mr. mr. wickfield wickfield for for some some time. time. i i was was prepared prepared for for a a great great change change in in him, him, after after what what i i had had heard heard from from agnes, agnes, but but his his appearance appearance shocked shocked me. me. it it was was not not that that he he looked looked many many years years older, older, though though still still dressed dressed with with the the old old scrupulous scrupulous cleanliness; cleanliness; or or that that there there was was an an unwholesome unwholesome ruddiness ruddiness upon upon his his face; face; or or that that his his eyes eyes were were full full and and bloodshot; bloodshot; or or that that there there was was a a nervous nervous trembling trembling in in his his hand, hand, the the cause cause of of which which i i knew, knew, and and had had for for some some years years seen seen at at work. work. it it was was not not that that he he had had lost lost his his good good looks, looks, or or his his old old bearing bearing of of a a gentleman gentleman -- -- for for that that he he had had not not -- -- but but the the thing thing that that struck struck me me most, most, was, was, that that with with the the evidences evidences of of his his native native superiority superiority still still upon upon him, him, he he should should submit submit himself himself to to that that crawling crawling impersonation impersonation of of meanness, meanness, uriah uriah heep. heep. the the reversal reversal of of the the two two natures, natures, in in their their relative relative positions, positions, uriah's uriah's of of power power and and mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's of of dependence, dependence, was was a a sight sight more more painful painful to to me me than than i i can can express. express. if if i i had had seen seen an an ape ape taking taking command command of of a a man, man, i i should should hardly hardly have have thought thought it it a a more more degrading degrading spectacle. spectacle. he he appeared appeared to to be be only only too too conscious conscious of of it it himself. himself. when when he he came came in, in, he he stood stood still; still; and and with with his his head head bowed, bowed, as as if if he he felt felt it. it. this this was was only only for for a a moment; moment; for for agnes agnes softly softly said said to to him, him, 'papa! 'papa! here here is is miss miss trotwood trotwood -- -- and and trotwood, trotwood, whom whom you have have not not seen seen for for a a long long while!' while!' and and then then he he approached, approached, and and constrainedly constrainedly gave gave my my aunt aunt his his hand, hand, and and shook shook hands hands more more cordially cordially with with me. me. in in the the moment's moment's pause pause i i speak speak of, of, i i saw saw uriah's uriah's countenance countenance form form itself itself into into a a most most ill-favoured ill-favoured smile. smile. agnes agnes saw saw it it too, too, i i think, think, for for she she shrank shrank from from him. him. what what my my aunt aunt saw, saw, or or did did not not see, see, i i defy defy the the science science of of physiognomy physiognomy to to have have made made out, out, without without her her own own consent. consent. i i believe believe there there never never was was anybody anybody with with such such an an imperturbable imperturbable countenance countenance when when she she chose. chose. her her face face might might have have been been a a dead-wall dead-wall on on the the occasion occasion in in question, question, for for any any light light it it threw threw upon upon her her thoughts; thoughts; until until she she broke broke silence silence with with her her usual usual abruptness. abruptness. 'well, 'well, wickfield!' wickfield!' said said my my aunt; aunt; and and he he looked looked up up at at her her for for the the first first time. time. 'i 'i have have been been telling telling your your daughter daughter how how well well i i have have been been disposing disposing of of my my money money for for myself, myself, because because i i couldn't couldn't trust trust it it to to you, as as you were were growing growing rusty rusty in in business business matters. matters. we we have have been been taking taking counsel counsel together, together, and and getting getting on on very very well, well, all all things things considered. considered. agnes agnes is is worth worth the the whole whole firm, firm, in in my my opinion.' opinion.' 'if 'if i i may may umbly umbly make make the the remark,' remark,' said said uriah uriah heep, heep, with with a a writhe, writhe, 'i 'i fully fully agree agree with with miss miss betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, and and should should be be only only too too appy appy if if miss miss agnes agnes was was a a partner.' partner.' 'you're 'you're a a partner partner yourself, yourself, you know,' know,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and that's that's about about enough enough for for you, i i expect. expect. how how do do you find find yourself, yourself, sir?' sir?' in in acknowledgement acknowledgement of of this this question, question, addressed addressed to to him him with with extraordinary extraordinary curtness, curtness, mr. mr. heep, heep, uncomfortably uncomfortably clutching clutching the the blue blue bag bag he he carried, carried, replied replied that that he he was was pretty pretty well, well, he he thanked thanked my my aunt, aunt, and and hoped hoped she she was was the the same. same. 'and 'and you, master master -- -- i i should should say, say, mister mister copperfield,' copperfield,' pursued pursued uriah. uriah. 'i 'i hope hope i i see see you well! well! i i am am rejoiced rejoiced to to see see you, mister mister copperfield, copperfield, even even under under present present circumstances.' circumstances.' i i believed believed that; that; for for he he seemed seemed to to relish relish them them very very much. much. 'present 'present circumstances circumstances is is not not what what your your friends friends would would wish wish for for you, mister mister copperfield, copperfield, but but it it isn't isn't money money makes makes the the man: man: it's it's -- -- i i am am really really unequal unequal with with my my umble umble powers powers to to express express what what it it is,' is,' said said uriah, uriah, with with a a fawning fawning jerk, jerk, 'but 'but it it isn't isn't money!' money!' here here he he shook shook hands hands with with me: me: not not in in the the common common way, way, but but standing standing at at a a good good distance distance from from me, me, and and lifting lifting my my hand hand up up and and down down like like a a pump pump handle, handle, that that he he was was a a little little afraid afraid of. of. 'and 'and how how do do you think think we we are are looking, looking, master master copperfield, copperfield, -- -- i i should should say, say, mister?' mister?' fawned fawned uriah. uriah. 'don't 'don't you find find mr. mr. wickfield wickfield blooming, blooming, sir? sir? years years don't don't tell tell much much in in our our firm, firm, master master copperfield, copperfield, except except in in raising raising up up the the umble, umble, namely, namely, mother mother and and self self -- -- and and in in developing,' developing,' he he added, added, as as an an afterthought, afterthought, 'the 'the beautiful, beautiful, namely, namely, miss miss agnes.' agnes.' he he jerked jerked himself himself about, about, after after this this compliment, compliment, in in such such an an intolerable intolerable manner, manner, that that my my aunt, aunt, who who had had sat sat looking looking straight straight at at him, him, lost lost all all patience. patience. 'deuce 'deuce take take the the man!' man!' said said my my aunt, aunt, sternly, sternly, 'what's 'what's he he about? about? don't don't be be galvanic, galvanic, sir!' sir!' 'i 'i ask ask your your pardon, pardon, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' returned returned uriah; uriah; 'i'm 'i'm aware aware you're you're nervous.' nervous.' 'go 'go along along with with you, sir!' sir!' said said my my aunt, aunt, anything anything but but appeased. appeased. 'don't 'don't presume presume to to say say so! so! i i am am nothing nothing of of the the sort. sort. if if you're you're an an eel, eel, sir, sir, conduct conduct yourself yourself like like one. one. if if you're you're a a man, man, control control your your limbs, limbs, sir! sir! good good god!' god!' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with great great indignation, indignation, 'i 'i am am not not going going to to be be serpentined serpentined and and corkscrewed corkscrewed out out of of my my senses!' senses!' mr. mr. heep heep was was rather rather abashed, abashed, as as most most people people might might have have been, been, by by this this explosion; explosion; which which derived derived great great additional additional force force from from the the indignant indignant manner manner in in which which my my aunt aunt afterwards afterwards moved moved in in her her chair, chair, and and shook shook her her head head as as if if she she were were making making snaps snaps or or bounces bounces at at him. him. but but he he said said to to me me aside aside in in a a meek meek voice: voice: 'i 'i am am well well aware, aware, master master copperfield, copperfield, that that miss miss trotwood, trotwood, though though an an excellent excellent lady, lady, has has a a quick quick temper temper (indeed (indeed i i think think i i had had the the pleasure pleasure of of knowing knowing her, her, when when i i was was a a numble numble clerk, clerk, before before you did, did, master master copperfield), copperfield), and and it's it's only only natural, natural, i i am am sure, sure, that that it it should should be be made made quicker quicker by by present present circumstances. circumstances. the the wonder wonder is, is, that that it it isn't isn't much much worse! worse! i i only only called called to to say say that that if if there there was was anything anything we we could could do, do, in in present present circumstances, circumstances, mother mother or or self, self, or or wickfield wickfield and and heep, heep, -- -- we we should should be be really really glad. glad. i i may may go go so so far?' far?' said said uriah, uriah, with with a a sickly sickly smile smile at at his his partner. partner. 'uriah 'uriah heep,' heep,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, in in a a monotonous monotonous forced forced way, way, 'is 'is active active in in the the business, business, trotwood. trotwood. what what he he says, says, i i quite quite concur concur in. in. you know know i i had had an an old old interest interest in in you. apart apart from from that, that, what what uriah uriah says says i i quite quite concur concur in!' in!' 'oh, 'oh, what what a a reward reward it it is,' is,' said said uriah, uriah, drawing drawing up up one one leg, leg, at at the the risk risk of of bringing bringing down down upon upon himself himself another another visitation visitation from from my my aunt, aunt, 'to 'to be be so so trusted trusted in! in! but but i i hope hope i i am am able able to to do do something something to to relieve relieve him him from from the the fatigues fatigues of of business, business, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' 'uriah 'uriah heep heep is is a a great great relief relief to to me,' me,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, in in the the same same dull dull voice. voice. 'it's 'it's a a load load off off my my mind, mind, trotwood, trotwood, to to have have such such a a partner.' partner.' the the red red fox fox made made him him say say all all this, this, i i knew, knew, to to exhibit exhibit him him to to me me in in the the light light he he had had indicated indicated on on the the night night when when he he poisoned poisoned my my rest. rest. i i saw saw the the same same ill-favoured ill-favoured smile smile upon upon his his face face again, again, and and saw saw how how he he watched watched me. me. 'you are are not not going, going, papa?' papa?' said said agnes, agnes, anxiously. anxiously. 'will 'will you not not walk walk back back with with trotwood trotwood and and me?' me?' he he would would have have looked looked to to uriah, uriah, i i believe, believe, before before replying, replying, if if that that worthy worthy had had not not anticipated anticipated him. him. 'i 'i am am bespoke bespoke myself,' myself,' said said uriah, uriah, 'on 'on business; business; otherwise otherwise i i should should have have been been appy appy to to have have kept kept with with my my friends. friends. but but i i leave leave my my partner partner to to represent represent the the firm. firm. miss miss agnes, agnes, ever ever yours! yours! i i wish wish you good-day, good-day, master master copperfield, copperfield, and and leave leave my my umble umble respects respects for for miss miss betsey betsey trotwood.' trotwood.' with with those those words, words, he he retired, retired, kissing kissing his his great great hand, hand, and and leering leering at at us us like like a a mask. mask. we we sat sat there, there, talking talking about about our our pleasant pleasant old old canterbury canterbury days, days, an an hour hour or or two. two. mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, left left to to agnes, agnes, soon soon became became more more like like his his former former self; self; though though there there was was a a settled settled depression depression upon upon him, him, which which he he never never shook shook off. off. for for all all that, that, he he brightened; brightened; and and had had an an evident evident pleasure pleasure in in hearing hearing us us recall recall the the little little incidents incidents of of our our old old life, life, many many of of which which he he remembered remembered very very well. well. he he said said it it was was like like those those times, times, to to be be alone alone with with agnes agnes and and me me again; again; and and he he wished wished to to heaven heaven they they had had never never changed. changed. i i am am sure sure there there was was an an influence influence in in the the placid placid face face of of agnes, agnes, and and in in the the very very touch touch of of her her hand hand upon upon his his arm, arm, that that did did wonders wonders for for him. him. my my aunt aunt (who (who was was busy busy nearly nearly all all this this while while with with peggotty, peggotty, in in the the inner inner room) room) would would not not accompany accompany us us to to the the place place where where they they were were staying, staying, but but insisted insisted on on my my going; going; and and i i went. went. we we dined dined together. together. after after dinner, dinner, agnes agnes sat sat beside beside him, him, as as of of old, old, and and poured poured out out his his wine. wine. he he took took what what she she gave gave him, him, and and no no more more -- -- like like a a child child -- -- and and we we all all three three sat sat together together at at a a window window as as the the evening evening gathered gathered in. in. when when it it was was almost almost dark, dark, he he lay lay down down on on a a sofa, sofa, agnes agnes pillowing pillowing his his head head and and bending bending over over him him a a little little while; while; and and when when she she came came back back to to the the window, window, it it was was not not so so dark dark but but i i could could see see tears tears glittering glittering in in her her eyes. eyes. i i pray pray heaven heaven that that i i never never may may forget forget the the dear dear girl girl in in her her love love and and truth, truth, at at that that time time of of my my life; life; for for if if i i should, should, i i must must be be drawing drawing near near the the end, end, and and then then i i would would desire desire to to remember remember her her best! best! she she filled filled my my heart heart with with such such good good resolutions, resolutions, strengthened strengthened my my weakness weakness so, so, by by her her example, example, so so directed directed -- -- i i know know not not how, how, she she was was too too modest modest and and gentle gentle to to advise advise me me in in many many words words -- -- the the wandering wandering ardour ardour and and unsettled unsettled purpose purpose within within me, me, that that all all the the little little good good i i have have done, done, and and all all the the harm harm i i have have forborne, forborne, i i solemnly solemnly believe believe i i may may refer refer to to her. her. and and how how she she spoke spoke to to me me of of dora, dora, sitting sitting at at the the window window in in the the dark; dark; listened listened to to my my praises praises of of her; her; praised praised again; again; and and round round the the little little fairy-figure fairy-figure shed shed some some glimpses glimpses of of her her own own pure pure light, light, that that made made it it yet yet more more precious precious and and more more innocent innocent to to me! me! oh, oh, agnes, agnes, sister sister of of my my boyhood, boyhood, if if i i had had known known then, then, what what i i knew knew long long afterwards afterwards -- -- ! ! there there was was a a beggar beggar in in the the street, street, when when i i went went down; down; and and as as i i turned turned my my head head towards towards the the window, window, thinking thinking of of her her calm calm seraphic seraphic eyes, eyes, he he made made me me start start by by muttering, muttering, as as if if he he were were an an echo echo of of the the morning: morning: 'blind! 'blind! blind! blind! blind!' blind!' chapter chapter 36. 36. enthusiasm enthusiasm i i began began the the next next day day with with another another dive dive into into the the roman roman bath, bath, and and then then started started for for highgate. highgate. i i was was not not dispirited dispirited now. now. i i was was not not afraid afraid of of the the shabby shabby coat, coat, and and had had no no yearnings yearnings after after gallant gallant greys. greys. my my whole whole manner manner of of thinking thinking of of our our late late misfortune misfortune was was changed. changed. what what i i had had to to do, do, was, was, to to show show my my aunt aunt that that her her past past goodness goodness to to me me had had not not been been thrown thrown away away on on an an insensible, insensible, ungrateful ungrateful object. object. what what i i had had to to do, do, was, was, to to turn turn the the painful painful discipline discipline of of my my younger younger days days to to account, account, by by going going to to work work with with a a resolute resolute and and steady steady heart. heart. what what i i had had to to do, do, was, was, to to take take my my woodman's woodman's axe axe in in my my hand, hand, and and clear clear my my own own way way through through the the forest forest of of difficulty, difficulty, by by cutting cutting down down the the trees trees until until i i came came to to dora. dora. and and i i went went on on at at a a mighty mighty rate, rate, as as if if it it could could be be done done by by walking. walking. when when i i found found myself myself on on the the familiar familiar highgate highgate road, road, pursuing pursuing such such a a different different errand errand from from that that old old one one of of pleasure, pleasure, with with which which it it was was associated, associated, it it seemed seemed as as if if a a complete complete change change had had come come on on my my whole whole life. life. but but that that did did not not discourage discourage me. me. with with the the new new life, life, came came new new purpose, purpose, new new intention. intention. great great was was the the labour; labour; priceless priceless the the reward. reward. dora dora was was the the reward, reward, and and dora dora must must be be won. won. i i got got into into such such a a transport, transport, that that i i felt felt quite quite sorry sorry my my coat coat was was not not a a little little shabby shabby already. already. i i wanted wanted to to be be cutting cutting at at those those trees trees in in the the forest forest of of difficulty, difficulty, under under circumstances circumstances that that should should prove prove my my strength. strength. i i had had a a good good mind mind to to ask ask an an old old man, man, in in wire wire spectacles, spectacles, who who was was breaking breaking stones stones upon upon the the road, road, to to lend lend me me his his hammer hammer for for a a little little while, while, and and let let me me begin begin to to beat beat a a path path to to dora dora out out of of granite. granite. i i stimulated stimulated myself myself into into such such a a heat, heat, and and got got so so out out of of breath, breath, that that i i felt felt as as if if i i had had been been earning earning i i don't don't know know how how much. much. in in this this state, state, i i went went into into a a cottage cottage that that i i saw saw was was to to let, let, and and examined examined it it narrowly, narrowly, -- -- for for i i felt felt it it necessary necessary to to be be practical. practical. it it would would do do for for me me and and dora dora admirably: admirably: with with a a little little front front garden garden for for jip jip to to run run about about in, in, and and bark bark at at the the tradespeople tradespeople through through the the railings, railings, and and a a capital capital room room upstairs upstairs for for my my aunt. aunt. i i came came out out again, again, hotter hotter and and faster faster than than ever, ever, and and dashed dashed up up to to highgate, highgate, at at such such a a rate rate that that i i was was there there an an hour hour too too early; early; and, and, though though i i had had not not been, been, should should have have been been obliged obliged to to stroll stroll about about to to cool cool myself, myself, before before i i was was at at all all presentable. presentable. my my first first care, care, after after putting putting myself myself under under this this necessary necessary course course of of preparation, preparation, was was to to find find the the doctor's doctor's house. house. it it was was not not in in that that part part of of highgate highgate where where mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth lived, lived, but but quite quite on on the the opposite opposite side side of of the the little little town. town. when when i i had had made made this this discovery, discovery, i i went went back, back, in in an an attraction attraction i i could could not not resist, resist, to to a a lane lane by by mrs. mrs. steerforth's, steerforth's, and and looked looked over over the the corner corner of of the the garden garden wall. wall. his his room room was was shut shut up up close. close. the the conservatory conservatory doors doors were were standing standing open, open, and and rosa rosa dartle dartle was was walking, walking, bareheaded, bareheaded, with with a a quick, quick, impetuous impetuous step, step, up up and and down down a a gravel gravel walk walk on on one one side side of of the the lawn. lawn. she she gave gave me me the the idea idea of of some some fierce fierce thing, thing, that that was was dragging dragging the the length length of of its its chain chain to to and and fro fro upon upon a a beaten beaten track, track, and and wearing wearing its its heart heart out. out. i i came came softly softly away away from from my my place place of of observation, observation, and and avoiding avoiding that that part part of of the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, and and wishing wishing i i had had not not gone gone near near it, it, strolled strolled about about until until it it was was ten ten o'clock. o'clock. the the church church with with the the slender slender spire, spire, that that stands stands on on the the top top of of the the hill hill now, now, was was not not there there then then to to tell tell me me the the time. time. an an old old red-brick red-brick mansion, mansion, used used as as a a school, school, was was in in its its place; place; and and a a fine fine old old house house it it must must have have been been to to go go to to school school at, at, as as i i recollect recollect it. it. when when i i approached approached the the doctor's doctor's cottage cottage -- -- a a pretty pretty old old place, place, on on which which he he seemed seemed to to have have expended expended some some money, money, if if i i might might judge judge from from the the embellishments embellishments and and repairs repairs that that had had the the look look of of being being just just completed completed -- -- i i saw saw him him walking walking in in the the garden garden at at the the side, side, gaiters gaiters and and all, all, as as if if he he had had never never left left off off walking walking since since the the days days of of my my pupilage. pupilage. he he had had his his old old companions companions about about him, him, too; too; for for there there were were plenty plenty of of high high trees trees in in the the neighbourhood, neighbourhood, and and two two or or three three rooks rooks were were on on the the grass, grass, looking looking after after him, him, as as if if they they had had been been written written to to about about him him by by the the canterbury canterbury rooks, rooks, and and were were observing observing him him closely closely in in consequence. consequence. knowing knowing the the utter utter hopelessness hopelessness of of attracting attracting his his attention attention from from that that distance, distance, i i made made bold bold to to open open the the gate, gate, and and walk walk after after him, him, so so as as to to meet meet him him when when he he should should turn turn round. round. when when he he did, did, and and came came towards towards me, me, he he looked looked at at me me thoughtfully thoughtfully for for a a few few moments, moments, evidently evidently without without thinking thinking about about me me at at all; all; and and then then his his benevolent benevolent face face expressed expressed extraordinary extraordinary pleasure, pleasure, and and he he took took me me by by both both hands. hands. 'why, 'why, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'you are are a a man! man! how how do do you do? do? i i am am delighted delighted to to see see you. my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, how how very very much much you have have improved! improved! you are are quite quite -- -- yes yes -- -- dear dear me!' me!' i i hoped hoped he he was was well, well, and and mrs. mrs. strong strong too. too. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, yes!' yes!' said said the the doctor; doctor; 'annie's 'annie's quite quite well, well, and and she'll she'll be be delighted delighted to to see see you. you were were always always her her favourite. favourite. she she said said so, so, last last night, night, when when i i showed showed her her your your letter. letter. and and -- -- yes, yes, to to be be sure sure -- -- you recollect recollect mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, copperfield?' copperfield?' 'perfectly, 'perfectly, sir.' sir.' 'of 'of course,' course,' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'to 'to be be sure. sure. he's he's pretty pretty well, well, too.' too.' 'has 'has he he come come home, home, sir?' sir?' i i inquired. inquired. 'from 'from india?' india?' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'yes. 'yes. mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon couldn't couldn't bear bear the the climate, climate, my my dear. dear. mrs. mrs. markleham markleham -- -- you have have not not forgotten forgotten mrs. mrs. markleham?' markleham?' forgotten forgotten the the old old soldier! soldier! and and in in that that short short time! time! 'mrs. 'mrs. markleham,' markleham,' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'was 'was quite quite vexed vexed about about him, him, poor poor thing; thing; so so we we have have got got him him at at home home again; again; and and we we have have bought bought him him a a little little patent patent place, place, which which agrees agrees with with him him much much better.' better.' i i knew knew enough enough of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon to to suspect suspect from from this this account account that that it it was was a a place place where where there there was was not not much much to to do, do, and and which which was was pretty pretty well well paid. paid. the the doctor, doctor, walking walking up up and and down down with with his his hand hand on on my my shoulder, shoulder, and and his his kind kind face face turned turned encouragingly encouragingly to to mine, mine, went went on: on: 'now, 'now, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, in in reference reference to to this this proposal proposal of of yours. yours. it's it's very very gratifying gratifying and and agreeable agreeable to to me, me, i i am am sure; sure; but but don't don't you think think you could could do do better? better? you achieved achieved distinction, distinction, you know, know, when when you were were with with us. us. you are are qualified qualified for for many many good good things. things. you have have laid laid a a foundation foundation that that any any edifice edifice may may be be raised raised upon; upon; and and is is it it not not a a pity pity that that you should should devote devote the the spring-time spring-time of of your your life life to to such such a a poor poor pursuit pursuit as as i i can can offer?' offer?' i i became became very very glowing glowing again, again, and, and, expressing expressing myself myself in in a a rhapsodical rhapsodical style, style, i i am am afraid, afraid, urged urged my my request request strongly; strongly; reminding reminding the the doctor doctor that that i i had had already already a a profession. profession. 'well, 'well, well,' well,' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'that's 'that's true. true. certainly, certainly, your your having having a a profession, profession, and and being being actually actually engaged engaged in in studying studying it, it, makes makes a a difference. difference. but, but, my my good good young young friend, friend, what's what's seventy seventy pounds pounds a a year?' year?' 'it 'it doubles doubles our our income, income, doctor doctor strong,' strong,' said said i. i. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' replied replied the the doctor. doctor. 'to 'to think think of of that! that! not not that that i i mean mean to to say say it's it's rigidly rigidly limited limited to to seventy seventy pounds pounds a-year, a-year, because because i i have have always always contemplated contemplated making making any any young young friend friend i i might might thus thus employ, employ, a a present present too. too. undoubtedly,' undoubtedly,' said said the the doctor, doctor, still still walking walking me me up up and and down down with with his his hand hand on on my my shoulder. shoulder. 'i 'i have have always always taken taken an an annual annual present present into into account.' account.' 'my 'my dear dear tutor,' tutor,' said said i i (now, (now, really, really, without without any any nonsense), nonsense), 'to 'to whom whom i i owe owe more more obligations obligations already already than than i i ever ever can can acknowledge acknowledge -- -- ' ' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' interposed interposed the the doctor. doctor. 'pardon 'pardon me!' me!' 'if 'if you will will take take such such time time as as i i have, have, and and that that is is my my mornings mornings and and evenings, evenings, and and can can think think it it worth worth seventy seventy pounds pounds a a year, year, you will will do do me me such such a a service service as as i i cannot cannot express.' express.' 'dear 'dear me!' me!' said said the the doctor, doctor, innocently. innocently. 'to 'to think think that that so so little little should should go go for for so so much! much! dear, dear, dear! dear! and and when when you can can do do better, better, you will? will? on on your your word, word, now?' now?' said said the the doctor, doctor, -- -- which which he he had had always always made made a a very very grave grave appeal appeal to to the the honour honour of of us us boys. boys. 'on 'on my my word, word, sir!' sir!' i i returned, returned, answering answering in in our our old old school school manner. manner. 'then 'then be be it it so,' so,' said said the the doctor, doctor, clapping clapping me me on on the the shoulder, shoulder, and and still still keeping keeping his his hand hand there, there, as as we we still still walked walked up up and and down. down. 'and 'and i i shall shall be be twenty twenty times times happier, happier, sir,' sir,' said said i, i, with with a a little little -- -- i i hope hope innocent innocent -- -- flattery, flattery, 'if 'if my my employment employment is is to to be be on on the the dictionary.' dictionary.' the the doctor doctor stopped, stopped, smilingly smilingly clapped clapped me me on on the the shoulder shoulder again, again, and and exclaimed, exclaimed, with with a a triumph triumph most most delightful delightful to to behold, behold, as as if if i i had had penetrated penetrated to to the the profoundest profoundest depths depths of of mortal mortal sagacity, sagacity, 'my 'my dear dear young young friend, friend, you have have hit hit it. it. it it is is the the dictionary!' dictionary!' how how could could it it be be anything anything else! else! his his pockets pockets were were as as full full of of it it as as his his head. head. it it was was sticking sticking out out of of him him in in all all directions. directions. he he told told me me that that since since his his retirement retirement from from scholastic scholastic life, life, he he had had been been advancing advancing with with it it wonderfully; wonderfully; and and that that nothing nothing could could suit suit him him better better than than the the proposed proposed arrangements arrangements for for morning morning and and evening evening work, work, as as it it was was his his custom custom to to walk walk about about in in the the daytime daytime with with his his considering considering cap cap on. on. his his papers papers were were in in a a little little confusion, confusion, in in consequence consequence of of mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon having having lately lately proffered proffered his his occasional occasional services services as as an an amanuensis, amanuensis, and and not not being being accustomed accustomed to to that that occupation; occupation; but but we we should should soon soon put put right right what what was was amiss, amiss, and and go go on on swimmingly. swimmingly. afterwards, afterwards, when when we we were were fairly fairly at at our our work, work, i i found found mr. mr. jack jack maldon's maldon's efforts efforts more more troublesome troublesome to to me me than than i i had had expected, expected, as as he he had had not not confined confined himself himself to to making making numerous numerous mistakes, mistakes, but but had had sketched sketched so so many many soldiers, soldiers, and and ladies' ladies' heads, heads, over over the the doctor's doctor's manuscript, manuscript, that that i i often often became became involved involved in in labyrinths labyrinths of of obscurity. obscurity. the the doctor doctor was was quite quite happy happy in in the the prospect prospect of of our our going going to to work work together together on on that that wonderful wonderful performance, performance, and and we we settled settled to to begin begin next next morning morning at at seven seven o'clock. o'clock. we we were were to to work work two two hours hours every every morning, morning, and and two two or or three three hours hours every every night, night, except except on on saturdays, saturdays, when when i i was was to to rest. rest. on on sundays, sundays, of of course, course, i i was was to to rest rest also, also, and and i i considered considered these these very very easy easy terms. terms. our our plans plans being being thus thus arranged arranged to to our our mutual mutual satisfaction, satisfaction, the the doctor doctor took took me me into into the the house house to to present present me me to to mrs. mrs. strong, strong, whom whom we we found found in in the the doctor's doctor's new new study, study, dusting dusting his his books, books, -- -- a a freedom freedom which which he he never never permitted permitted anybody anybody else else to to take take with with those those sacred sacred favourites. favourites. they they had had postponed postponed their their breakfast breakfast on on my my account, account, and and we we sat sat down down to to table table together. together. we we had had not not been been seated seated long, long, when when i i saw saw an an approaching approaching arrival arrival in in mrs. mrs. strong's strong's face, face, before before i i heard heard any any sound sound of of it. it. a a gentleman gentleman on on horseback horseback came came to to the the gate, gate, and and leading leading his his horse horse into into the the little little court, court, with with the the bridle bridle over over his his arm, arm, as as if if he he were were quite quite at at home, home, tied tied him him to to a a ring ring in in the the empty empty coach-house coach-house wall, wall, and and came came into into the the breakfast breakfast parlour, parlour, whip whip in in hand. hand. it it was was mr. mr. jack jack maldon; maldon; and and mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon was was not not at at all all improved improved by by india, india, i i thought. thought. i i was was in in a a state state of of ferocious ferocious virtue, virtue, however, however, as as to to young young men men who who were were not not cutting cutting down down trees trees in in the the forest forest of of difficulty; difficulty; and and my my impression impression must must be be received received with with due due allowance. allowance. 'mr. 'mr. jack!' jack!' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'copperfield!' 'copperfield!' mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon shook shook hands hands with with me; me; but but not not very very warmly, warmly, i i believed; believed; and and with with an an air air of of languid languid patronage, patronage, at at which which i i secretly secretly took took great great umbrage. umbrage. but but his his languor languor altogether altogether was was quite quite a a wonderful wonderful sight; sight; except except when when he he addressed addressed himself himself to to his his cousin cousin annie. annie. 'have 'have you breakfasted breakfasted this this morning, morning, mr. mr. jack?' jack?' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'i 'i hardly hardly ever ever take take breakfast, breakfast, sir,' sir,' he he replied, replied, with with his his head head thrown thrown back back in in an an easy-chair. easy-chair. 'i 'i find find it it bores bores me.' me.' 'is 'is there there any any news news today?' today?' inquired inquired the the doctor. doctor. 'nothing 'nothing at at all, all, sir,' sir,' replied replied mr. mr. maldon. maldon. 'there's 'there's an an account account about about the the people people being being hungry hungry and and discontented discontented down down in in the the north, north, but but they they are are always always being being hungry hungry and and discontented discontented somewhere.' somewhere.' the the doctor doctor looked looked grave, grave, and and said, said, as as though though he he wished wished to to change change the the subject, subject, 'then 'then there's there's no no news news at at all; all; and and no no news, news, they they say, say, is is good good news.' news.' 'there's 'there's a a long long statement statement in in the the papers, papers, sir, sir, about about a a murder,' murder,' observed observed mr. mr. maldon. maldon. 'but 'but somebody somebody is is always always being being murdered, murdered, and and i i didn't didn't read read it.' it.' a a display display of of indifference indifference to to all all the the actions actions and and passions passions of of mankind mankind was was not not supposed supposed to to be be such such a a distinguished distinguished quality quality at at that that time, time, i i think, think, as as i i have have observed observed it it to to be be considered considered since. since. i i have have known known it it very very fashionable fashionable indeed. indeed. i i have have seen seen it it displayed displayed with with such such success, success, that that i i have have encountered encountered some some fine fine ladies ladies and and gentlemen gentlemen who who might might as as well well have have been been born born caterpillars. caterpillars. perhaps perhaps it it impressed impressed me me the the more more then, then, because because it it was was new new to to me, me, but but it it certainly certainly did did not not tend tend to to exalt exalt my my opinion opinion of, of, or or to to strengthen strengthen my my confidence confidence in, in, mr. mr. jack jack maldon. maldon. 'i 'i came came out out to to inquire inquire whether whether annie annie would would like like to to go go to to the the opera opera tonight,' tonight,' said said mr. mr. maldon, maldon, turning turning to to her. her. 'it's 'it's the the last last good good night night there there will will be, be, this this season; season; and and there's there's a a singer singer there, there, whom whom she she really really ought ought to to hear. hear. she she is is perfectly perfectly exquisite. exquisite. besides besides which, which, she she is is so so charmingly charmingly ugly,' ugly,' relapsing relapsing into into languor. languor. the the doctor, doctor, ever ever pleased pleased with with what what was was likely likely to to please please his his young young wife, wife, turned turned to to her her and and said: said: 'you must must go, go, annie. annie. you must must go.' go.' 'i 'i would would rather rather not,' not,' she she said said to to the the doctor. doctor. 'i 'i prefer prefer to to remain remain at at home. home. i i would would much much rather rather remain remain at at home.' home.' without without looking looking at at her her cousin, cousin, she she then then addressed addressed me, me, and and asked asked me me about about agnes, agnes, and and whether whether she she should should see see her, her, and and whether whether she she was was not not likely likely to to come come that that day; day; and and was was so so much much disturbed, disturbed, that that i i wondered wondered how how even even the the doctor, doctor, buttering buttering his his toast, toast, could could be be blind blind to to what what was was so so obvious. obvious. but but he he saw saw nothing. nothing. he he told told her, her, good-naturedly, good-naturedly, that that she she was was young young and and ought ought to to be be amused amused and and entertained, entertained, and and must must not not allow allow herself herself to to be be made made dull dull by by a a dull dull old old fellow. fellow. moreover, moreover, he he said, said, he he wanted wanted to to hear hear her her sing sing all all the the new new singer's singer's songs songs to to him; him; and and how how could could she she do do that that well, well, unless unless she she went? went? so so the the doctor doctor persisted persisted in in making making the the engagement engagement for for her, her, and and mr. mr. jack jack maldon maldon was was to to come come back back to to dinner. dinner. this this concluded, concluded, he he went went to to his his patent patent place, place, i i suppose; suppose; but but at at all all events events went went away away on on his his horse, horse, looking looking very very idle. idle. i i was was curious curious to to find find out out next next morning, morning, whether whether she she had had been. been. she she had had not, not, but but had had sent sent into into london london to to put put her her cousin cousin off; off; and and had had gone gone out out in in the the afternoon afternoon to to see see agnes, agnes, and and had had prevailed prevailed upon upon the the doctor doctor to to go go with with her; her; and and they they had had walked walked home home by by the the fields, fields, the the doctor doctor told told me, me, the the evening evening being being delightful. delightful. i i wondered wondered then, then, whether whether she she would would have have gone gone if if agnes agnes had had not not been been in in town, town, and and whether whether agnes agnes had had some some good good influence influence over over her her too! too! she she did did not not look look very very happy, happy, i i thought; thought; but but it it was was a a good good face, face, or or a a very very false false one. one. i i often often glanced glanced at at it, it, for for she she sat sat in in the the window window all all the the time time we we were were at at work; work; and and made made our our breakfast, breakfast, which which we we took took by by snatches snatches as as we we were were employed. employed. when when i i left, left, at at nine nine o'clock, o'clock, she she was was kneeling kneeling on on the the ground ground at at the the doctor's doctor's feet, feet, putting putting on on his his shoes shoes and and gaiters gaiters for for him. him. there there was was a a softened softened shade shade upon upon her her face, face, thrown thrown from from some some green green leaves leaves overhanging overhanging the the open open window window of of the the low low room; room; and and i i thought thought all all the the way way to to doctors' doctors' commons, commons, of of the the night night when when i i had had seen seen it it looking looking at at him him as as he he read. read. i i was was pretty pretty busy busy now; now; up up at at five five in in the the morning, morning, and and home home at at nine nine or or ten ten at at night. night. but but i i had had infinite infinite satisfaction satisfaction in in being being so so closely closely engaged, engaged, and and never never walked walked slowly slowly on on any any account, account, and and felt felt enthusiastically enthusiastically that that the the more more i i tired tired myself, myself, the the more more i i was was doing doing to to deserve deserve dora. dora. i i had had not not revealed revealed myself myself in in my my altered altered character character to to dora dora yet, yet, because because she she was was coming coming to to see see miss miss mills mills in in a a few few days, days, and and i i deferred deferred all all i i had had to to tell tell her her until until then; then; merely merely informing informing her her in in my my letters letters (all (all our our communications communications were were secretly secretly forwarded forwarded through through miss miss mills), mills), that that i i had had much much to to tell tell her. her. in in the the meantime, meantime, i i put put myself myself on on a a short short allowance allowance of of bear's bear's grease, grease, wholly wholly abandoned abandoned scented scented soap soap and and lavender lavender water, water, and and sold sold off off three three waistcoats waistcoats at at a a prodigious prodigious sacrifice, sacrifice, as as being being too too luxurious luxurious for for my my stern stern career. career. not not satisfied satisfied with with all all these these proceedings, proceedings, but but burning burning with with impatience impatience to to do do something something more, more, i i went went to to see see traddles, traddles, now now lodging lodging up up behind behind the the parapet parapet of of a a house house in in castle castle street, street, holborn. holborn. mr. mr. dick, dick, who who had had been been with with me me to to highgate highgate twice twice already, already, and and had had resumed resumed his his companionship companionship with with the the doctor, doctor, i i took took with with me. me. i i took took mr. mr. dick dick with with me, me, because, because, acutely acutely sensitive sensitive to to my my aunt's aunt's reverses, reverses, and and sincerely sincerely believing believing that that no no galley-slave galley-slave or or convict convict worked worked as as i i did, did, he he had had begun begun to to fret fret and and worry worry himself himself out out of of spirits spirits and and appetite, appetite, as as having having nothing nothing useful useful to to do. do. in in this this condition, condition, he he felt felt more more incapable incapable of of finishing finishing the the memorial memorial than than ever; ever; and and the the harder harder he he worked worked at at it, it, the the oftener oftener that that unlucky unlucky head head of of king king charles charles the the first first got got into into it. it. seriously seriously apprehending apprehending that that his his malady malady would would increase, increase, unless unless we we put put some some innocent innocent deception deception upon upon him him and and caused caused him him to to believe believe that that he he was was useful, useful, or or unless unless we we could could put put him him in in the the way way of of being being really really useful useful (which (which would would be be better), better), i i made made up up my my mind mind to to try try if if traddles traddles could could help help us. us. before before we we went, went, i i wrote wrote traddles traddles a a full full statement statement of of all all that that had had happened, happened, and and traddles traddles wrote wrote me me back back a a capital capital answer, answer, expressive expressive of of his his sympathy sympathy and and friendship. friendship. we we found found him him hard hard at at work work with with his his inkstand inkstand and and papers, papers, refreshed refreshed by by the the sight sight of of the the flower-pot flower-pot stand stand and and the the little little round round table table in in a a corner corner of of the the small small apartment. apartment. he he received received us us cordially, cordially, and and made made friends friends with with mr. mr. dick dick in in a a moment. moment. mr. mr. dick dick professed professed an an absolute absolute certainty certainty of of having having seen seen him him before, before, and and we we both both said, said, 'very 'very likely.' likely.' the the first first subject subject on on which which i i had had to to consult consult traddles traddles was was this, this, -- -- i i had had heard heard that that many many men men distinguished distinguished in in various various pursuits pursuits had had begun begun life life by by reporting reporting the the debates debates in in parliament. parliament. traddles traddles having having mentioned mentioned newspapers newspapers to to me, me, as as one one of of his his hopes, hopes, i i had had put put the the two two things things together, together, and and told told traddles traddles in in my my letter letter that that i i wished wished to to know know how how i i could could qualify qualify myself myself for for this this pursuit. pursuit. traddles traddles now now informed informed me, me, as as the the result result of of his his inquiries, inquiries, that that the the mere mere mechanical mechanical acquisition acquisition necessary, necessary, except except in in rare rare cases, cases, for for thorough thorough excellence excellence in in it, it, that that is is to to say, say, a a perfect perfect and and entire entire command command of of the the mystery mystery of of short-hand short-hand writing writing and and reading, reading, was was about about equal equal in in difficulty difficulty to to the the mastery mastery of of six six languages; languages; and and that that it it might might perhaps perhaps be be attained, attained, by by dint dint of of perseverance, perseverance, in in the the course course of of a a few few years. years. traddles traddles reasonably reasonably supposed supposed that that this this would would settle settle the the business; business; but but i, i, only only feeling feeling that that here here indeed indeed were were a a few few tall tall trees trees to to be be hewn hewn down, down, immediately immediately resolved resolved to to work work my my way way on on to to dora dora through through this this thicket, thicket, axe axe in in hand. hand. 'i 'i am am very very much much obliged obliged to to you, my my dear dear traddles!' traddles!' said said i. i. 'i'll 'i'll begin begin tomorrow.' tomorrow.' traddles traddles looked looked astonished, astonished, as as he he well well might; might; but but he he had had no no notion notion as as yet yet of of my my rapturous rapturous condition. condition. 'i'll 'i'll buy buy a a book,' book,' said said i, i, 'with 'with a a good good scheme scheme of of this this art art in in it; it; i'll i'll work work at at it it at at the the commons, commons, where where i i haven't haven't half half enough enough to to do; do; i'll i'll take take down down the the speeches speeches in in our our court court for for practice practice -- -- traddles, traddles, my my dear dear fellow, fellow, i'll i'll master master it!' it!' 'dear 'dear me,' me,' said said traddles, traddles, opening opening his his eyes, eyes, 'i 'i had had no no idea idea you were were such such a a determined determined character, character, copperfield!' copperfield!' i i don't don't know know how how he he should should have have had, had, for for it it was was new new enough enough to to me. me. i i passed passed that that off, off, and and brought brought mr. mr. dick dick on on the the carpet. carpet. 'you see,' see,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, wistfully, wistfully, 'if 'if i i could could exert exert myself, myself, mr. mr. traddles traddles -- -- if if i i could could beat beat a a drum drum -- -- or or blow blow anything!' anything!' poor poor fellow! fellow! i i have have little little doubt doubt he he would would have have preferred preferred such such an an employment employment in in his his heart heart to to all all others. others. traddles, traddles, who who would would not not have have smiled smiled for for the the world, world, replied replied composedly: composedly: 'but 'but you are are a a very very good good penman, penman, sir. sir. you told told me me so, so, copperfield?' copperfield?' 'excellent!' 'excellent!' said said i. i. and and indeed indeed he he was. was. he he wrote wrote with with extraordinary extraordinary neatness. neatness. 'don't 'don't you think,' think,' said said traddles, traddles, 'you could could copy copy writings, writings, sir, sir, if if i i got got them them for for you?' mr. mr. dick dick looked looked doubtfully doubtfully at at me. me. 'eh, 'eh, trotwood?' trotwood?' i i shook shook my my head. head. mr. mr. dick dick shook shook his, his, and and sighed. sighed. 'tell 'tell him him about about the the memorial,' memorial,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. i i explained explained to to traddles traddles that that there there was was a a difficulty difficulty in in keeping keeping king king charles charles the the first first out out of of mr. mr. dick's dick's manuscripts; manuscripts; mr. mr. dick dick in in the the meanwhile meanwhile looking looking very very deferentially deferentially and and seriously seriously at at traddles, traddles, and and sucking sucking his his thumb. thumb. 'but 'but these these writings, writings, you know, know, that that i i speak speak of, of, are are already already drawn drawn up up and and finished,' finished,' said said traddles traddles after after a a little little consideration. consideration. 'mr. 'mr. dick dick has has nothing nothing to to do do with with them. them. wouldn't wouldn't that that make make a a difference, difference, copperfield? copperfield? at at all all events, events, wouldn't wouldn't it it be be well well to to try?' try?' this this gave gave us us new new hope. hope. traddles traddles and and i i laying laying our our heads heads together together apart, apart, while while mr. mr. dick dick anxiously anxiously watched watched us us from from his his chair, chair, we we concocted concocted a a scheme scheme in in virtue virtue of of which which we we got got him him to to work work next next day, day, with with triumphant triumphant success. success. on on a a table table by by the the window window in in buckingham buckingham street, street, we we set set out out the the work work traddles traddles procured procured for for him him -- -- which which was was to to make, make, i i forget forget how how many many copies copies of of a a legal legal document document about about some some right right of of way way -- -- and and on on another another table table we we spread spread the the last last unfinished unfinished original original of of the the great great memorial. memorial. our our instructions instructions to to mr. mr. dick dick were were that that he he should should copy copy exactly exactly what what he he had had before before him, him, without without the the least least departure departure from from the the original; original; and and that that when when he he felt felt it it necessary necessary to to make make the the slightest slightest allusion allusion to to king king charles charles the the first, first, he he should should fly fly to to the the memorial. memorial. we we exhorted exhorted him him to to be be resolute resolute in in this, this, and and left left my my aunt aunt to to observe observe him. him. my my aunt aunt reported reported to to us, us, afterwards, afterwards, that, that, at at first, first, he he was was like like a a man man playing playing the the kettle-drums, kettle-drums, and and constantly constantly divided divided his his attentions attentions between between the the two; two; but but that, that, finding finding this this confuse confuse and and fatigue fatigue him, him, and and having having his his copy copy there, there, plainly plainly before before his his eyes, eyes, he he soon soon sat sat at at it it in in an an orderly orderly business-like business-like manner, manner, and and postponed postponed the the memorial memorial to to a a more more convenient convenient time. time. in in a a word, word, although although we we took took great great care care that that he he should should have have no no more more to to do do than than was was good good for for him, him, and and although although he he did did not not begin begin with with the the beginning beginning of of a a week, week, he he earned earned by by the the following following saturday saturday night night ten ten shillings shillings and and nine-pence; nine-pence; and and never, never, while while i i live, live, shall shall i i forget forget his his going going about about to to all all the the shops shops in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood to to change change this this treasure treasure into into sixpences, sixpences, or or his his bringing bringing them them to to my my aunt aunt arranged arranged in in the the form form of of a a heart heart upon upon a a waiter, waiter, with with tears tears of of joy joy and and pride pride in in his his eyes. eyes. he he was was like like one one under under the the propitious propitious influence influence of of a a charm, charm, from from the the moment moment of of his his being being usefully usefully employed; employed; and and if if there there were were a a happy happy man man in in the the world, world, that that saturday saturday night, night, it it was was the the grateful grateful creature creature who who thought thought my my aunt aunt the the most most wonderful wonderful woman woman in in existence, existence, and and me me the the most most wonderful wonderful young young man. man. 'no 'no starving starving now, now, trotwood,' trotwood,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, shaking shaking hands hands with with me me in in a a corner. corner. 'i'll 'i'll provide provide for for her, her, sir!' sir!' and and he he flourished flourished his his ten ten fingers fingers in in the the air, air, as as if if they they were were ten ten banks. banks. i i hardly hardly know know which which was was the the better better pleased, pleased, traddles traddles or or i. i. 'it 'it really,' really,' said said traddles, traddles, suddenly, suddenly, taking taking a a letter letter out out of of his his pocket, pocket, and and giving giving it it to to me, me, 'put 'put mr. mr. micawber micawber quite quite out out of of my my head!' head!' the the letter letter (mr. (mr. micawber micawber never never missed missed any any possible possible opportunity opportunity of of writing writing a a letter) letter) was was addressed addressed to to me, me, 'by 'by the the kindness kindness of of t. t. traddles, traddles, esquire, esquire, of of the the inner inner temple.' temple.' it it ran ran thus: thus: -- -- 'my 'my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, 'you may may possibly possibly not not be be unprepared unprepared to to receive receive the the intimation intimation that that something something has has turned turned up. up. i i may may have have mentioned mentioned to to you on on a a former former occasion occasion that that i i was was in in expectation expectation of of such such an an event. event. 'i 'i am am about about to to establish establish myself myself in in one one of of the the provincial provincial towns towns of of our our favoured favoured island island (where (where the the society society may may be be described described as as a a happy happy admixture admixture of of the the agricultural agricultural and and the the clerical), clerical), in in immediate immediate connexion connexion with with one one of of the the learned learned professions. professions. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and our our offspring offspring will will accompany accompany me. me. our our ashes, ashes, at at a a future future period, period, will will probably probably be be found found commingled commingled in in the the cemetery cemetery attached attached to to a a venerable venerable pile, pile, for for which which the the spot spot to to which which i i refer refer has has acquired acquired a a reputation, reputation, shall shall i i say say from from china china to to peru? peru? 'in 'in bidding bidding adieu adieu to to the the modern modern babylon, babylon, where where we we have have undergone undergone many many vicissitudes, vicissitudes, i i trust trust not not ignobly, ignobly, mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and myself myself cannot cannot disguise disguise from from our our minds minds that that we we part, part, it it may may be be for for years years and and it it may may be be for for ever, ever, with with an an individual individual linked linked by by strong strong associations associations to to the the altar altar of of our our domestic domestic life. life. if, if, on on the the eve eve of of such such a a departure, departure, you will will accompany accompany our our mutual mutual friend, friend, mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, to to our our present present abode, abode, and and there there reciprocate reciprocate the the wishes wishes natural natural to to the the occasion, occasion, you will will confer confer a a boon boon 'on 'on 'one 'one 'who 'who 'is 'is 'ever 'ever yours, yours, 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber.' micawber.' i i was was glad glad to to find find that that mr. mr. micawber micawber had had got got rid rid of of his his dust dust and and ashes, ashes, and and that that something something really really had had turned turned up up at at last. last. learning learning from from traddles traddles that that the the invitation invitation referred referred to to the the evening evening then then wearing wearing away, away, i i expressed expressed my my readiness readiness to to do do honour honour to to it; it; and and we we went went off off together together to to the the lodging lodging which which mr. mr. micawber micawber occupied occupied as as mr. mr. mortimer, mortimer, and and which which was was situated situated near near the the top top of of the the gray's gray's inn inn road. road. the the resources resources of of this this lodging lodging were were so so limited, limited, that that we we found found the the twins, twins, now now some some eight eight or or nine nine years years old, old, reposing reposing in in a a turn-up turn-up bedstead bedstead in in the the family family sitting-room, sitting-room, where where mr. mr. micawber micawber had had prepared, prepared, in in a a wash-hand-stand wash-hand-stand jug, jug, what what he he called called 'a 'a brew' brew' of of the the agreeable agreeable beverage beverage for for which which he he was was famous. famous. i i had had the the pleasure, pleasure, on on this this occasion, occasion, of of renewing renewing the the acquaintance acquaintance of of master master micawber, micawber, whom whom i i found found a a promising promising boy boy of of about about twelve twelve or or thirteen, thirteen, very very subject subject to to that that restlessness restlessness of of limb limb which which is is not not an an unfrequent unfrequent phenomenon phenomenon in in youths youths of of his his age. age. i i also also became became once once more more known known to to his his sister, sister, miss miss micawber, micawber, in in whom, whom, as as mr. mr. micawber micawber told told us, us, 'her 'her mother mother renewed renewed her her youth, youth, like like the the phoenix'. phoenix'. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'yourself 'yourself and and mr. mr. traddles traddles find find us us on on the the brink brink of of migration, migration, and and will will excuse excuse any any little little discomforts discomforts incidental incidental to to that that position.' position.' glancing glancing round round as as i i made made a a suitable suitable reply, reply, i i observed observed that that the the family family effects effects were were already already packed, packed, and and that that the the amount amount of of luggage luggage was was by by no no means means overwhelming. overwhelming. i i congratulated congratulated mrs. mrs. micawber micawber on on the the approaching approaching change. change. 'my 'my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'of 'of your your friendly friendly interest interest in in all all our our affairs, affairs, i i am am well well assured. assured. my my family family may may consider consider it it banishment, banishment, if if they they please; please; but but i i am am a a wife wife and and mother, mother, and and i i never never will will desert desert mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' traddles, traddles, appealed appealed to to by by mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's eye, eye, feelingly feelingly acquiesced. acquiesced. 'that,' 'that,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'that, 'that, at at least, least, is is my my view, view, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield copperfield and and mr. mr. traddles, traddles, of of the the obligation obligation which which i i took took upon upon myself myself when when i i repeated repeated the the irrevocable irrevocable words, words, "i, "i, emma, emma, take take thee, thee, wilkins." wilkins." i i read read the the service service over over with with a a flat-candle flat-candle on on the the previous previous night, night, and and the the conclusion conclusion i i derived derived from from it it was, was, that that i i never never could could desert desert mr. mr. micawber. micawber. and,' and,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'though 'though it it is is possible possible i i may may be be mistaken mistaken in in my my view view of of the the ceremony, ceremony, i i never never will!' will!' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, a a little little impatiently, impatiently, 'i 'i am am not not conscious conscious that that you are are expected expected to to do do anything anything of of the the sort.' sort.' 'i 'i am am aware, aware, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' pursued pursued mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that i i am am now now about about to to cast cast my my lot lot among among strangers; strangers; and and i i am am also also aware aware that that the the various various members members of of my my family, family, to to whom whom mr. mr. micawber micawber has has written written in in the the most most gentlemanly gentlemanly terms, terms, announcing announcing that that fact, fact, have have not not taken taken the the least least notice notice of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's communication. communication. indeed indeed i i may may be be superstitious,' superstitious,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'but 'but it it appears appears to to me me that that mr. mr. micawber micawber is is destined destined never never to to receive receive any any answers answers whatever whatever to to the the great great majority majority of of the the communications communications he he writes. writes. i i may may augur, augur, from from the the silence silence of of my my family, family, that that they they object object to to the the resolution resolution i i have have taken; taken; but but i i should should not not allow allow myself myself to to be be swerved swerved from from the the path path of of duty, duty, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, even even by by my my papa papa and and mama, mama, were were they they still still living.' living.' i i expressed expressed my my opinion opinion that that this this was was going going in in the the right right direction. direction. 'it 'it may may be be a a sacrifice,' sacrifice,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'to 'to immure immure one's-self one's-self in in a a cathedral cathedral town; town; but but surely, surely, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, if if it it is is a a sacrifice sacrifice in in me, me, it it is is much much more more a a sacrifice sacrifice in in a a man man of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities.' abilities.' 'oh! 'oh! you are are going going to to a a cathedral cathedral town?' town?' said said i. i. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who had had been been helping helping us us all, all, out out of of the the wash-hand-stand wash-hand-stand jug, jug, replied: replied: 'to 'to canterbury. canterbury. in in fact, fact, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, i i have have entered entered into into arrangements, arrangements, by by virtue virtue of of which which i i stand stand pledged pledged and and contracted contracted to to our our friend friend heep, heep, to to assist assist and and serve serve him him in in the the capacity capacity of of -- -- and and to to be be -- -- his his confidential confidential clerk.' clerk.' i i stared stared at at mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who greatly greatly enjoyed enjoyed my my surprise. surprise. 'i 'i am am bound bound to to state state to to you,' he he said, said, with with an an official official air, air, 'that 'that the the business business habits, habits, and and the the prudent prudent suggestions, suggestions, of of mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, have have in in a a great great measure measure conduced conduced to to this this result. result. the the gauntlet, gauntlet, to to which which mrs. mrs. micawber micawber referred referred upon upon a a former former occasion, occasion, being being thrown thrown down down in in the the form form of of an an advertisement, advertisement, was was taken taken up up by by my my friend friend heep, heep, and and led led to to a a mutual mutual recognition. recognition. of of my my friend friend heep,' heep,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'who 'who is is a a man man of of remarkable remarkable shrewdness, shrewdness, i i desire desire to to speak speak with with all all possible possible respect. respect. my my friend friend heep heep has has not not fixed fixed the the positive positive remuneration remuneration at at too too high high a a figure, figure, but but he he has has made made a a great great deal, deal, in in the the way way of of extrication extrication from from the the pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary difficulties, difficulties, contingent contingent on on the the value value of of my my services; services; and and on on the the value value of of those those services services i i pin pin my my faith. faith. such such address address and and intelligence intelligence as as i i chance chance to to possess,' possess,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, boastfully boastfully disparaging disparaging himself, himself, with with the the old old genteel genteel air, air, 'will 'will be be devoted devoted to to my my friend friend heep's heep's service. service. i i have have already already some some acquaintance acquaintance with with the the law law -- -- as as a a defendant defendant on on civil civil process process -- -- and and i i shall shall immediately immediately apply apply myself myself to to the the commentaries commentaries of of one one of of the the most most eminent eminent and and remarkable remarkable of of our our english english jurists. jurists. i i believe believe it it is is unnecessary unnecessary to to add add that that i i allude allude to to mr. mr. justice justice blackstone.' blackstone.' these these observations, observations, and and indeed indeed the the greater greater part part of of the the observations observations made made that that evening, evening, were were interrupted interrupted by by mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's discovering discovering that that master master micawber micawber was was sitting sitting on on his his boots, boots, or or holding holding his his head head on on with with both both arms arms as as if if he he felt felt it it loose, loose, or or accidentally accidentally kicking kicking traddles traddles under under the the table, table, or or shuffling shuffling his his feet feet over over one one another, another, or or producing producing them them at at distances distances from from himself himself apparently apparently outrageous outrageous to to nature, nature, or or lying lying sideways sideways with with his his hair hair among among the the wine-glasses, wine-glasses, or or developing developing his his restlessness restlessness of of limb limb in in some some other other form form incompatible incompatible with with the the general general interests interests of of society; society; and and by by master master micawber's micawber's receiving receiving those those discoveries discoveries in in a a resentful resentful spirit. spirit. i i sat sat all all the the while, while, amazed amazed by by mr. mr. micawber's micawber's disclosure, disclosure, and and wondering wondering what what it it meant; meant; until until mrs. mrs. micawber micawber resumed resumed the the thread thread of of the the discourse, discourse, and and claimed claimed my my attention. attention. 'what 'what i i particularly particularly request request mr. mr. micawber micawber to to be be careful careful of, of, is,' is,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that he he does does not, not, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, in in applying applying himself himself to to this this subordinate subordinate branch branch of of the the law, law, place place it it out out of of his his power power to to rise, rise, ultimately, ultimately, to to the the top top of of the the tree. tree. i i am am convinced convinced that that mr. mr. micawber, micawber, giving giving his his mind mind to to a a profession profession so so adapted adapted to to his his fertile fertile resources, resources, and and his his flow flow of of language, language, must must distinguish distinguish himself. himself. now, now, for for example, example, mr. mr. traddles,' traddles,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, assuming assuming a a profound profound air, air, 'a 'a judge, judge, or or even even say say a a chancellor. chancellor. does does an an individual individual place place himself himself beyond beyond the the pale pale of of those those preferments preferments by by entering entering on on such such an an office office as as mr. mr. micawber micawber has has accepted?' accepted?' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber micawber -- -- but but glancing glancing inquisitively inquisitively at at traddles, traddles, too; too; 'we 'we have have time time enough enough before before us, us, for for the the consideration consideration of of those those questions.' questions.' 'micawber,' 'micawber,' she she returned, returned, 'no! 'no! your your mistake mistake in in life life is, is, that that you do do not not look look forward forward far far enough. enough. you are are bound, bound, in in justice justice to to your your family, family, if if not not to to yourself, yourself, to to take take in in at at a a comprehensive comprehensive glance glance the the extremest extremest point point in in the the horizon horizon to to which which your your abilities abilities may may lead lead you.' mr. mr. micawber micawber coughed, coughed, and and drank drank his his punch punch with with an an air air of of exceeding exceeding satisfaction satisfaction -- -- still still glancing glancing at at traddles, traddles, as as if if he he desired desired to to have have his his opinion. opinion. 'why, 'why, the the plain plain state state of of the the case, case, mrs. mrs. micawber,' micawber,' said said traddles, traddles, mildly mildly breaking breaking the the truth truth to to her. her. 'i 'i mean mean the the real real prosaic prosaic fact, fact, you know know -- -- ' ' 'just 'just so,' so,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'my 'my dear dear mr. mr. traddles, traddles, i i wish wish to to be be as as prosaic prosaic and and literal literal as as possible possible on on a a subject subject of of so so much much importance.' importance.' ' ' -- -- is,' is,' said said traddles, traddles, 'that 'that this this branch branch of of the the law, law, even even if if mr. mr. micawber micawber were were a a regular regular solicitor solicitor -- -- ' ' 'exactly 'exactly so,' so,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. ('wilkins, ('wilkins, you are are squinting, squinting, and and will will not not be be able able to to get get your your eyes eyes back.') back.') ' ' -- -- has has nothing,' nothing,' pursued pursued traddles, traddles, 'to 'to do do with with that. that. only only a a barrister barrister is is eligible eligible for for such such preferments; preferments; and and mr. mr. micawber micawber could could not not be be a a barrister, barrister, without without being being entered entered at at an an inn inn of of court court as as a a student, student, for for five five years.' years.' 'do 'do i i follow follow you?' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, with with her her most most affable affable air air of of business. business. 'do 'do i i understand, understand, my my dear dear mr. mr. traddles, traddles, that, that, at at the the expiration expiration of of that that period, period, mr. mr. micawber micawber would would be be eligible eligible as as a a judge judge or or chancellor?' chancellor?' 'he 'he would would be be eligible,' eligible,' returned returned traddles, traddles, with with a a strong strong emphasis emphasis on on that that word. word. 'thank 'thank you,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'that 'that is is quite quite sufficient. sufficient. if if such such is is the the case, case, and and mr. mr. micawber micawber forfeits forfeits no no privilege privilege by by entering entering on on these these duties, duties, my my anxiety anxiety is is set set at at rest. rest. i i speak,' speak,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'as 'as a a female, female, necessarily; necessarily; but but i i have have always always been been of of opinion opinion that that mr. mr. micawber micawber possesses possesses what what i i have have heard heard my my papa papa call, call, when when i i lived lived at at home, home, the the judicial judicial mind; mind; and and i i hope hope mr. mr. micawber micawber is is now now entering entering on on a a field field where where that that mind mind will will develop develop itself, itself, and and take take a a commanding commanding station.' station.' i i quite quite believe believe that that mr. mr. micawber micawber saw saw himself, himself, in in his his judicial judicial mind's mind's eye, eye, on on the the woolsack. woolsack. he he passed passed his his hand hand complacently complacently over over his his bald bald head, head, and and said said with with ostentatious ostentatious resignation: resignation: 'my 'my dear, dear, we we will will not not anticipate anticipate the the decrees decrees of of fortune. fortune. if if i i am am reserved reserved to to wear wear a a wig, wig, i i am am at at least least prepared, prepared, externally,' externally,' in in allusion allusion to to his his baldness, baldness, 'for 'for that that distinction. distinction. i i do do not,' not,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'regret 'regret my my hair, hair, and and i i may may have have been been deprived deprived of of it it for for a a specific specific purpose. purpose. i i cannot cannot say. say. it it is is my my intention, intention, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, to to educate educate my my son son for for the the church; church; i i will will not not deny deny that that i i should should be be happy, happy, on on his his account, account, to to attain attain to to eminence.' eminence.' 'for 'for the the church?' church?' said said i, i, still still pondering, pondering, between between whiles, whiles, on on uriah uriah heep. heep. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'he 'he has has a a remarkable remarkable head-voice, head-voice, and and will will commence commence as as a a chorister. chorister. our our residence residence at at canterbury, canterbury, and and our our local local connexion, connexion, will, will, no no doubt, doubt, enable enable him him to to take take advantage advantage of of any any vacancy vacancy that that may may arise arise in in the the cathedral cathedral corps.' corps.' on on looking looking at at master master micawber micawber again, again, i i saw saw that that he he had had a a certain certain expression expression of of face, face, as as if if his his voice voice were were behind behind his his eyebrows; eyebrows; where where it it presently presently appeared appeared to to be, be, on on his his singing singing us us (as (as an an alternative alternative between between that that and and bed) bed) 'the 'the wood-pecker wood-pecker tapping'. tapping'. after after many many compliments compliments on on this this performance, performance, we we fell fell into into some some general general conversation; conversation; and and as as i i was was too too full full of of my my desperate desperate intentions intentions to to keep keep my my altered altered circumstances circumstances to to myself, myself, i i made made them them known known to to mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. i i cannot cannot express express how how extremely extremely delighted delighted they they both both were, were, by by the the idea idea of of my my aunt's aunt's being being in in difficulties; difficulties; and and how how comfortable comfortable and and friendly friendly it it made made them. them. when when we we were were nearly nearly come come to to the the last last round round of of the the punch, punch, i i addressed addressed myself myself to to traddles, traddles, and and reminded reminded him him that that we we must must not not separate, separate, without without wishing wishing our our friends friends health, health, happiness, happiness, and and success success in in their their new new career. career. i i begged begged mr. mr. micawber micawber to to fill fill us us bumpers, bumpers, and and proposed proposed the the toast toast in in due due form: form: shaking shaking hands hands with with him him across across the the table, table, and and kissing kissing mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, to to commemorate commemorate that that eventful eventful occasion. occasion. traddles traddles imitated imitated me me in in the the first first particular, particular, but but did did not not consider consider himself himself a a sufficiently sufficiently old old friend friend to to venture venture on on the the second. second. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, rising rising with with one one of of his his thumbs thumbs in in each each of of his his waistcoat waistcoat pockets, pockets, 'the 'the companion companion of of my my youth: youth: if if i i may may be be allowed allowed the the expression expression -- -- and and my my esteemed esteemed friend friend traddles: traddles: if if i i may may be be permitted permitted to to call call him him so so -- -- will will allow allow me, me, on on the the part part of of mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, myself, myself, and and our our offspring, offspring, to to thank thank them them in in the the warmest warmest and and most most uncompromising uncompromising terms terms for for their their good good wishes. wishes. it it may may be be expected expected that that on on the the eve eve of of a a migration migration which which will will consign consign us us to to a a perfectly perfectly new new existence,' existence,' mr. mr. micawber micawber spoke spoke as as if if they they were were going going five five hundred hundred thousand thousand miles, miles, 'i 'i should should offer offer a a few few valedictory valedictory remarks remarks to to two two such such friends friends as as i i see see before before me. me. but but all all that that i i have have to to say say in in this this way, way, i i have have said. said. whatever whatever station station in in society society i i may may attain, attain, through through the the medium medium of of the the learned learned profession profession of of which which i i am am about about to to become become an an unworthy unworthy member, member, i i shall shall endeavour endeavour not not to to disgrace, disgrace, and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber will will be be safe safe to to adorn. adorn. under under the the temporary temporary pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary liabilities, liabilities, contracted contracted with with a a view view to to their their immediate immediate liquidation, liquidation, but but remaining remaining unliquidated unliquidated through through a a combination combination of of circumstances, circumstances, i i have have been been under under the the necessity necessity of of assuming assuming a a garb garb from from which which my my natural natural instincts instincts recoil recoil -- -- i i allude allude to to spectacles spectacles -- -- and and possessing possessing myself myself of of a a cognomen, cognomen, to to which which i i can can establish establish no no legitimate legitimate pretensions. pretensions. all all i i have have to to say say on on that that score score is, is, that that the the cloud cloud has has passed passed from from the the dreary dreary scene, scene, and and the the god god of of day day is is once once more more high high upon upon the the mountain mountain tops. tops. on on monday monday next, next, on on the the arrival arrival of of the the four four o'clock o'clock afternoon afternoon coach coach at at canterbury, canterbury, my my foot foot will will be be on on my my native native heath heath -- -- my my name, name, micawber!' micawber!' mr. mr. micawber micawber resumed resumed his his seat seat on on the the close close of of these these remarks, remarks, and and drank drank two two glasses glasses of of punch punch in in grave grave succession. succession. he he then then said said with with much much solemnity: solemnity: 'one 'one thing thing more more i i have have to to do, do, before before this this separation separation is is complete, complete, and and that that is is to to perform perform an an act act of of justice. justice. my my friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles has, has, on on two two several several occasions, occasions, "put "put his his name", name", if if i i may may use use a a common common expression, expression, to to bills bills of of exchange exchange for for my my accommodation. accommodation. on on the the first first occasion occasion mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles was was left left -- -- let let me me say, say, in in short, short, in in the the lurch. lurch. the the fulfilment fulfilment of of the the second second has has not not yet yet arrived. arrived. the the amount amount of of the the first first obligation,' obligation,' here here mr. mr. micawber micawber carefully carefully referred referred to to papers, papers, 'was, 'was, i i believe, believe, twenty-three, twenty-three, four, four, nine nine and and a a half, half, of of the the second, second, according according to to my my entry entry of of that that transaction, transaction, eighteen, eighteen, six, six, two. two. these these sums, sums, united, united, make make a a total, total, if if my my calculation calculation is is correct, correct, amounting amounting to to forty-one, forty-one, ten, ten, eleven eleven and and a a half. half. my my friend friend copperfield copperfield will will perhaps perhaps do do me me the the favour favour to to check check that that total?' total?' i i did did so so and and found found it it correct. correct. 'to 'to leave leave this this metropolis,' metropolis,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'and 'and my my friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, without without acquitting acquitting myself myself of of the the pecuniary pecuniary part part of of this this obligation, obligation, would would weigh weigh upon upon my my mind mind to to an an insupportable insupportable extent. extent. i i have, have, therefore, therefore, prepared prepared for for my my friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, and and i i now now hold hold in in my my hand, hand, a a document, document, which which accomplishes accomplishes the the desired desired object. object. i i beg beg to to hand hand to to my my friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles my my i.o.u. i.o.u. for for forty-one, forty-one, ten, ten, eleven eleven and and a a half, half, and and i i am am happy happy to to recover recover my my moral moral dignity, dignity, and and to to know know that that i i can can once once more more walk walk erect erect before before my my fellow fellow man!' man!' with with this this introduction introduction (which (which greatly greatly affected affected him), him), mr. mr. micawber micawber placed placed his his i.o.u. i.o.u. in in the the hands hands of of traddles, traddles, and and said said he he wished wished him him well well in in every every relation relation of of life. life. i i am am persuaded, persuaded, not not only only that that this this was was quite quite the the same same to to mr. mr. micawber micawber as as paying paying the the money, money, but but that that traddles traddles himself himself hardly hardly knew knew the the difference difference until until he he had had had had time time to to think think about about it. it. mr. mr. micawber micawber walked walked so so erect erect before before his his fellow fellow man, man, on on the the strength strength of of this this virtuous virtuous action, action, that that his his chest chest looked looked half half as as broad broad again again when when he he lighted lighted us us downstairs. downstairs. we we parted parted with with great great heartiness heartiness on on both both sides; sides; and and when when i i had had seen seen traddles traddles to to his his own own door, door, and and was was going going home home alone, alone, i i thought, thought, among among the the other other odd odd and and contradictory contradictory things things i i mused mused upon, upon, that, that, slippery slippery as as mr. mr. micawber micawber was, was, i i was was probably probably indebted indebted to to some some compassionate compassionate recollection recollection he he retained retained of of me me as as his his boy-lodger, boy-lodger, for for never never having having been been asked asked by by him him for for money. money. i i certainly certainly should should not not have have had had the the moral moral courage courage to to refuse refuse it; it; and and i i have have no no doubt doubt he he knew knew that that (to (to his his credit credit be be it it written), written), quite quite as as well well as as i i did. did. chapter chapter 37. 37. a a little little cold cold water water my my new new life life had had lasted lasted for for more more than than a a week, week, and and i i was was stronger stronger than than ever ever in in those those tremendous tremendous practical practical resolutions resolutions that that i i felt felt the the crisis crisis required. required. i i continued continued to to walk walk extremely extremely fast, fast, and and to to have have a a general general idea idea that that i i was was getting getting on. on. i i made made it it a a rule rule to to take take as as much much out out of of myself myself as as i i possibly possibly could, could, in in my my way way of of doing doing everything everything to to which which i i applied applied my my energies. energies. i i made made a a perfect perfect victim victim of of myself. myself. i i even even entertained entertained some some idea idea of of putting putting myself myself on on a a vegetable vegetable diet, diet, vaguely vaguely conceiving conceiving that, that, in in becoming becoming a a graminivorous graminivorous animal, animal, i i should should sacrifice sacrifice to to dora. dora. as as yet, yet, little little dora dora was was quite quite unconscious unconscious of of my my desperate desperate firmness, firmness, otherwise otherwise than than as as my my letters letters darkly darkly shadowed shadowed it it forth. forth. but but another another saturday saturday came, came, and and on on that that saturday saturday evening evening she she was was to to be be at at miss miss mills's; mills's; and and when when mr. mr. mills mills had had gone gone to to his his whist-club whist-club (telegraphed (telegraphed to to me me in in the the street, street, by by a a bird-cage bird-cage in in the the drawing-room drawing-room middle middle window), window), i i was was to to go go there there to to tea. tea. by by this this time, time, we we were were quite quite settled settled down down in in buckingham buckingham street, street, where where mr. mr. dick dick continued continued his his copying copying in in a a state state of of absolute absolute felicity. felicity. my my aunt aunt had had obtained obtained a a signal signal victory victory over over mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, by by paying paying her her off, off, throwing throwing the the first first pitcher pitcher she she planted planted on on the the stairs stairs out out of of window, window, and and protecting protecting in in person, person, up up and and down down the the staircase, staircase, a a supernumerary supernumerary whom whom she she engaged engaged from from the the outer outer world. world. these these vigorous vigorous measures measures struck struck such such terror terror to to the the breast breast of of mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, that that she she subsided subsided into into her her own own kitchen, kitchen, under under the the impression impression that that my my aunt aunt was was mad. mad. my my aunt aunt being being supremely supremely indifferent indifferent to to mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's opinion opinion and and everybody everybody else's, else's, and and rather rather favouring favouring than than discouraging discouraging the the idea, idea, mrs. mrs. crupp, crupp, of of late late the the bold, bold, became became within within a a few few days days so so faint-hearted, faint-hearted, that that rather rather than than encounter encounter my my aunt aunt upon upon the the staircase, staircase, she she would would endeavour endeavour to to hide hide her her portly portly form form behind behind doors doors -- -- leaving leaving visible, visible, however, however, a a wide wide margin margin of of flannel flannel petticoat petticoat -- -- or or would would shrink shrink into into dark dark corners. corners. this this gave gave my my aunt aunt such such unspeakable unspeakable satisfaction, satisfaction, that that i i believe believe she she took took a a delight delight in in prowling prowling up up and and down, down, with with her her bonnet bonnet insanely insanely perched perched on on the the top top of of her her head, head, at at times times when when mrs. mrs. crupp crupp was was likely likely to to be be in in the the way. way. my my aunt, aunt, being being uncommonly uncommonly neat neat and and ingenious, ingenious, made made so so many many little little improvements improvements in in our our domestic domestic arrangements, arrangements, that that i i seemed seemed to to be be richer richer instead instead of of poorer. poorer. among among the the rest, rest, she she converted converted the the pantry pantry into into a a dressing-room dressing-room for for me; me; and and purchased purchased and and embellished embellished a a bedstead bedstead for for my my occupation, occupation, which which looked looked as as like like a a bookcase bookcase in in the the daytime daytime as as a a bedstead bedstead could. could. i i was was the the object object of of her her constant constant solicitude; solicitude; and and my my poor poor mother mother herself herself could could not not have have loved loved me me better, better, or or studied studied more more how how to to make make me me happy. happy. peggotty peggotty had had considered considered herself herself highly highly privileged privileged in in being being allowed allowed to to participate participate in in these these labours; labours; and, and, although although she she still still retained retained something something of of her her old old sentiment sentiment of of awe awe in in reference reference to to my my aunt, aunt, had had received received so so many many marks marks of of encouragement encouragement and and confidence, confidence, that that they they were were the the best best friends friends possible. possible. but but the the time time had had now now come come (i (i am am speaking speaking of of the the saturday saturday when when i i was was to to take take tea tea at at miss miss mills's) mills's) when when it it was was necessary necessary for for her her to to return return home, home, and and enter enter on on the the discharge discharge of of the the duties duties she she had had undertaken undertaken in in behalf behalf of of ham. ham. 'so 'so good-bye, good-bye, barkis,' barkis,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and take take care care of of yourself! yourself! i i am am sure sure i i never never thought thought i i could could be be sorry sorry to to lose lose you!' i i took took peggotty peggotty to to the the coach coach office office and and saw saw her her off. off. she she cried cried at at parting, parting, and and confided confided her her brother brother to to my my friendship friendship as as ham ham had had done. done. we we had had heard heard nothing nothing of of him him since since he he went went away, away, that that sunny sunny afternoon. afternoon. 'and 'and now, now, my my own own dear dear davy,' davy,' said said peggotty, peggotty, 'if, 'if, while while you're you're a a prentice, prentice, you should should want want any any money money to to spend; spend; or or if, if, when when you're you're out out of of your your time, time, my my dear, dear, you should should want want any any to to set set you up up (and (and you must must do do one one or or other, other, or or both, both, my my darling); darling); who who has has such such a a good good right right to to ask ask leave leave to to lend lend it it you, as as my my sweet sweet girl's girl's own own old old stupid stupid me!' me!' i i was was not not so so savagely savagely independent independent as as to to say say anything anything in in reply, reply, but but that that if if ever ever i i borrowed borrowed money money of of anyone, anyone, i i would would borrow borrow it it of of her. her. next next to to accepting accepting a a large large sum sum on on the the spot, spot, i i believe believe this this gave gave peggotty peggotty more more comfort comfort than than anything anything i i could could have have done. done. 'and, 'and, my my dear!' dear!' whispered whispered peggotty, peggotty, 'tell 'tell the the pretty pretty little little angel angel that that i i should should so so have have liked liked to to see see her, her, only only for for a a minute! minute! and and tell tell her her that that before before she she marries marries my my boy, boy, i'll i'll come come and and make make your your house house so so beautiful beautiful for for you, if if you'll you'll let let me!' me!' i i declared declared that that nobody nobody else else should should touch touch it; it; and and this this gave gave peggotty peggotty such such delight delight that that she she went went away away in in good good spirits. spirits. i i fatigued fatigued myself myself as as much much as as i i possibly possibly could could in in the the commons commons all all day, day, by by a a variety variety of of devices, devices, and and at at the the appointed appointed time time in in the the evening evening repaired repaired to to mr. mr. mills's mills's street. street. mr. mr. mills, mills, who who was was a a terrible terrible fellow fellow to to fall fall asleep asleep after after dinner, dinner, had had not not yet yet gone gone out, out, and and there there was was no no bird-cage bird-cage in in the the middle middle window. window. he he kept kept me me waiting waiting so so long, long, that that i i fervently fervently hoped hoped the the club club would would fine fine him him for for being being late. late. at at last last he he came came out; out; and and then then i i saw saw my my own own dora dora hang hang up up the the bird-cage, bird-cage, and and peep peep into into the the balcony balcony to to look look for for me, me, and and run run in in again again when when she she saw saw i i was was there, there, while while jip jip remained remained behind, behind, to to bark bark injuriously injuriously at at an an immense immense butcher's butcher's dog dog in in the the street, street, who who could could have have taken taken him him like like a a pill. pill. dora dora came came to to the the drawing-room drawing-room door door to to meet meet me; me; and and jip jip came came scrambling scrambling out, out, tumbling tumbling over over his his own own growls, growls, under under the the impression impression that that i i was was a a bandit; bandit; and and we we all all three three went went in, in, as as happy happy and and loving loving as as could could be. be. i i soon soon carried carried desolation desolation into into the the bosom bosom of of our our joys joys -- -- not not that that i i meant meant to to do do it, it, but but that that i i was was so so full full of of the the subject subject -- -- by by asking asking dora, dora, without without the the smallest smallest preparation, preparation, if if she she could could love love a a beggar? beggar? my my pretty, pretty, little, little, startled startled dora! dora! her her only only association association with with the the word word was was a a yellow yellow face face and and a a nightcap, nightcap, or or a a pair pair of of crutches, crutches, or or a a wooden wooden leg, leg, or or a a dog dog with with a a decanter-stand decanter-stand in in his his mouth, mouth, or or something something of of that that kind; kind; and and she she stared stared at at me me with with the the most most delightful delightful wonder. wonder. 'how 'how can can you ask ask me me anything anything so so foolish?' foolish?' pouted pouted dora. dora. 'love 'love a a beggar!' beggar!' 'dora, 'dora, my my own own dearest!' dearest!' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am a a beggar!' beggar!' 'how 'how can can you be be such such a a silly silly thing,' thing,' replied replied dora, dora, slapping slapping my my hand, hand, 'as 'as to to sit sit there, there, telling telling such such stories? stories? i'll i'll make make jip jip bite bite you!' her her childish childish way way was was the the most most delicious delicious way way in in the the world world to to me, me, but but it it was was necessary necessary to to be be explicit, explicit, and and i i solemnly solemnly repeated: repeated: 'dora, 'dora, my my own own life, life, i i am am your your ruined ruined david!' david!' 'i 'i declare declare i'll i'll make make jip jip bite bite you!' said said dora, dora, shaking shaking her her curls, curls, 'if 'if you are are so so ridiculous.' ridiculous.' but but i i looked looked so so serious, serious, that that dora dora left left off off shaking shaking her her curls, curls, and and laid laid her her trembling trembling little little hand hand upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, and and first first looked looked scared scared and and anxious, anxious, then then began began to to cry. cry. that that was was dreadful. dreadful. i i fell fell upon upon my my knees knees before before the the sofa, sofa, caressing caressing her, her, and and imploring imploring her her not not to to rend rend my my heart; heart; but, but, for for some some time, time, poor poor little little dora dora did did nothing nothing but but exclaim exclaim oh oh dear! dear! oh oh dear! dear! and and oh, oh, she she was was so so frightened! frightened! and and where where was was julia julia mills! mills! and and oh, oh, take take her her to to julia julia mills, mills, and and go go away, away, please! please! until until i i was was almost almost beside beside myself. myself. at at last, last, after after an an agony agony of of supplication supplication and and protestation, protestation, i i got got dora dora to to look look at at me, me, with with a a horrified horrified expression expression of of face, face, which which i i gradually gradually soothed soothed until until it it was was only only loving, loving, and and her her soft, soft, pretty pretty cheek cheek was was lying lying against against mine. mine. then then i i told told her, her, with with my my arms arms clasped clasped round round her, her, how how i i loved loved her, her, so so dearly, dearly, and and so so dearly; dearly; how how i i felt felt it it right right to to offer offer to to release release her her from from her her engagement, engagement, because because now now i i was was poor; poor; how how i i never never could could bear bear it, it, or or recover recover it, it, if if i i lost lost her; her; how how i i had had no no fears fears of of poverty, poverty, if if she she had had none, none, my my arm arm being being nerved nerved and and my my heart heart inspired inspired by by her; her; how how i i was was already already working working with with a a courage courage such such as as none none but but lovers lovers knew; knew; how how i i had had begun begun to to be be practical, practical, and and look look into into the the future; future; how how a a crust crust well well earned earned was was sweeter sweeter far far than than a a feast feast inherited; inherited; and and much much more more to to the the same same purpose, purpose, which which i i delivered delivered in in a a burst burst of of passionate passionate eloquence eloquence quite quite surprising surprising to to myself, myself, though though i i had had been been thinking thinking about about it, it, day day and and night, night, ever ever since since my my aunt aunt had had astonished astonished me. me. 'is 'is your your heart heart mine mine still, still, dear dear dora?' dora?' said said i, i, rapturously, rapturously, for for i i knew knew by by her her clinging clinging to to me me that that it it was. was. 'oh, 'oh, yes!' yes!' cried cried dora. dora. 'oh, 'oh, yes, yes, it's it's all all yours. yours. oh, oh, don't don't be be dreadful!' dreadful!' i i dreadful! dreadful! to to dora! dora! 'don't 'don't talk talk about about being being poor, poor, and and working working hard!' hard!' said said dora, dora, nestling nestling closer closer to to me. me. 'oh, 'oh, don't, don't, don't!' don't!' 'my 'my dearest dearest love,' love,' said said i, i, 'the 'the crust crust well-earned well-earned -- -- ' ' 'oh, 'oh, yes; yes; but but i i don't don't want want to to hear hear any any more more about about crusts!' crusts!' said said dora. dora. 'and 'and jip jip must must have have a a mutton-chop mutton-chop every every day day at at twelve, twelve, or or he'll he'll die.' die.' i i was was charmed charmed with with her her childish, childish, winning winning way. way. i i fondly fondly explained explained to to dora dora that that jip jip should should have have his his mutton-chop mutton-chop with with his his accustomed accustomed regularity. regularity. i i drew drew a a picture picture of of our our frugal frugal home, home, made made independent independent by by my my labour labour -- -- sketching sketching in in the the little little house house i i had had seen seen at at highgate, highgate, and and my my aunt aunt in in her her room room upstairs. upstairs. 'i 'i am am not not dreadful dreadful now, now, dora?' dora?' said said i, i, tenderly. tenderly. 'oh, 'oh, no, no, no!' no!' cried cried dora. dora. 'but 'but i i hope hope your your aunt aunt will will keep keep in in her her own own room room a a good good deal. deal. and and i i hope hope she's she's not not a a scolding scolding old old thing!' thing!' if if it it were were possible possible for for me me to to love love dora dora more more than than ever, ever, i i am am sure sure i i did. did. but but i i felt felt she she was was a a little little impracticable. impracticable. it it damped damped my my new-born new-born ardour, ardour, to to find find that that ardour ardour so so difficult difficult of of communication communication to to her. her. i i made made another another trial. trial. when when she she was was quite quite herself herself again, again, and and was was curling curling jip's jip's ears, ears, as as he he lay lay upon upon her her lap, lap, i i became became grave, grave, and and said: said: 'my 'my own! own! may may i i mention mention something?' something?' 'oh, 'oh, please please don't don't be be practical!' practical!' said said dora, dora, coaxingly. coaxingly. 'because 'because it it frightens frightens me me so!' so!' 'sweetheart!' 'sweetheart!' i i returned; returned; 'there 'there is is nothing nothing to to alarm alarm you in in all all this. this. i i want want you to to think think of of it it quite quite differently. differently. i i want want to to make make it it nerve nerve you, and and inspire inspire you, dora!' dora!' 'oh, 'oh, but but that's that's so so shocking!' shocking!' cried cried dora. dora. 'my 'my love, love, no. no. perseverance perseverance and and strength strength of of character character will will enable enable us us to to bear bear much much worse worse things.' things.' 'but 'but i i haven't haven't got got any any strength strength at at all,' all,' said said dora, dora, shaking shaking her her curls. curls. 'have 'have i, i, jip? jip? oh, oh, do do kiss kiss jip, jip, and and be be agreeable!' agreeable!' it it was was impossible impossible to to resist resist kissing kissing jip, jip, when when she she held held him him up up to to me me for for that that purpose, purpose, putting putting her her own own bright, bright, rosy rosy little little mouth mouth into into kissing kissing form, form, as as she she directed directed the the operation, operation, which which she she insisted insisted should should be be performed performed symmetrically, symmetrically, on on the the centre centre of of his his nose. nose. i i did did as as she she bade bade me me -- -- rewarding rewarding myself myself afterwards afterwards for for my my obedience obedience -- -- and and she she charmed charmed me me out out of of my my graver graver character character for for i i don't don't know know how how long. long. 'but, 'but, dora, dora, my my beloved!' beloved!' said said i, i, at at last last resuming resuming it; it; 'i 'i was was going going to to mention mention something.' something.' the the judge judge of of the the prerogative prerogative court court might might have have fallen fallen in in love love with with her, her, to to see see her her fold fold her her little little hands hands and and hold hold them them up, up, begging begging and and praying praying me me not not to to be be dreadful dreadful any any more. more. 'indeed 'indeed i i am am not not going going to to be, be, my my darling!' darling!' i i assured assured her. her. 'but, 'but, dora, dora, my my love, love, if if you will will sometimes sometimes think, think, -- -- not not despondingly, despondingly, you know; know; far far from from that! that! -- -- but but if if you will will sometimes sometimes think think -- -- just just to to encourage encourage yourself yourself -- -- that that you are are engaged engaged to to a a poor poor man man -- -- ' ' 'don't, 'don't, don't! don't! pray pray don't!' don't!' cried cried dora. dora. 'it's 'it's so so very very dreadful!' dreadful!' 'my 'my soul, soul, not not at at all!' all!' said said i, i, cheerfully. cheerfully. 'if 'if you will will sometimes sometimes think think of of that, that, and and look look about about now now and and then then at at your your papa's papa's housekeeping, housekeeping, and and endeavour endeavour to to acquire acquire a a little little habit habit -- -- of of accounts, accounts, for for instance instance -- -- ' ' poor poor little little dora dora received received this this suggestion suggestion with with something something that that was was half half a a sob sob and and half half a a scream. scream. ' ' -- -- it it would would be be so so useful useful to to us us afterwards,' afterwards,' i i went went on. on. 'and 'and if if you would would promise promise me me to to read read a a little little -- -- a a little little cookery cookery book book that that i i would would send send you, it it would would be be so so excellent excellent for for both both of of us. us. for for our our path path in in life, life, my my dora,' dora,' said said i, i, warming warming with with the the subject, subject, 'is 'is stony stony and and rugged rugged now, now, and and it it rests rests with with us us to to smooth smooth it. it. we we must must fight fight our our way way onward. onward. we we must must be be brave. brave. there there are are obstacles obstacles to to be be met, met, and and we we must must meet, meet, and and crush crush them!' them!' i i was was going going on on at at a a great great rate, rate, with with a a clenched clenched hand, hand, and and a a most most enthusiastic enthusiastic countenance; countenance; but but it it was was quite quite unnecessary unnecessary to to proceed. proceed. i i had had said said enough. enough. i i had had done done it it again. again. oh, oh, she she was was so so frightened! frightened! oh, oh, where where was was julia julia mills! mills! oh, oh, take take her her to to julia julia mills, mills, and and go go away, away, please! please! so so that, that, in in short, short, i i was was quite quite distracted, distracted, and and raved raved about about the the drawing-room. drawing-room. i i thought thought i i had had killed killed her, her, this this time. time. i i sprinkled sprinkled water water on on her her face. face. i i went went down down on on my my knees. knees. i i plucked plucked at at my my hair. hair. i i denounced denounced myself myself as as a a remorseless remorseless brute brute and and a a ruthless ruthless beast. beast. i i implored implored her her forgiveness. forgiveness. i i besought besought her her to to look look up. up. i i ravaged ravaged miss miss mills's mills's work-box work-box for for a a smelling-bottle, smelling-bottle, and and in in my my agony agony of of mind mind applied applied an an ivory ivory needle-case needle-case instead, instead, and and dropped dropped all all the the needles needles over over dora. dora. i i shook shook my my fists fists at at jip, jip, who who was was as as frantic frantic as as myself. myself. i i did did every every wild wild extravagance extravagance that that could could be be done, done, and and was was a a long long way way beyond beyond the the end end of of my my wits wits when when miss miss mills mills came came into into the the room. room. 'who 'who has has done done this?' this?' exclaimed exclaimed miss miss mills, mills, succouring succouring her her friend. friend. i i replied, replied, 'i, 'i, miss miss mills! mills! i i have have done done it! it! behold behold the the destroyer!' destroyer!' -- -- or or words words to to that that effect effect -- -- and and hid hid my my face face from from the the light, light, in in the the sofa sofa cushion. cushion. at at first first miss miss mills mills thought thought it it was was a a quarrel, quarrel, and and that that we we were were verging verging on on the the desert desert of of sahara; sahara; but but she she soon soon found found out out how how matters matters stood, stood, for for my my dear dear affectionate affectionate little little dora, dora, embracing embracing her, her, began began exclaiming exclaiming that that i i was was 'a 'a poor poor labourer'; labourer'; and and then then cried cried for for me, me, and and embraced embraced me, me, and and asked asked me me would would i i let let her her give give me me all all her her money money to to keep, keep, and and then then fell fell on on miss miss mills's mills's neck, neck, sobbing sobbing as as if if her her tender tender heart heart were were broken. broken. miss miss mills mills must must have have been been born born to to be be a a blessing blessing to to us. us. she she ascertained ascertained from from me me in in a a few few words words what what it it was was all all about, about, comforted comforted dora, dora, and and gradually gradually convinced convinced her her that that i i was was not not a a labourer labourer -- -- from from my my manner manner of of stating stating the the case case i i believe believe dora dora concluded concluded that that i i was was a a navigator, navigator, and and went went balancing balancing myself myself up up and and down down a a plank plank all all day day with with a a wheelbarrow wheelbarrow -- -- and and so so brought brought us us together together in in peace. peace. when when we we were were quite quite composed, composed, and and dora dora had had gone gone up-stairs up-stairs to to put put some some rose-water rose-water to to her her eyes, eyes, miss miss mills mills rang rang for for tea. tea. in in the the ensuing ensuing interval, interval, i i told told miss miss mills mills that that she she was was evermore evermore my my friend, friend, and and that that my my heart heart must must cease cease to to vibrate vibrate ere ere i i could could forget forget her her sympathy. sympathy. i i then then expounded expounded to to miss miss mills mills what what i i had had endeavoured, endeavoured, so so very very unsuccessfully, unsuccessfully, to to expound expound to to dora. dora. miss miss mills mills replied, replied, on on general general principles, principles, that that the the cottage cottage of of content content was was better better than than the the palace palace of of cold cold splendour, splendour, and and that that where where love love was, was, all all was. was. i i said said to to miss miss mills mills that that this this was was very very true, true, and and who who should should know know it it better better than than i, i, who who loved loved dora dora with with a a love love that that never never mortal mortal had had experienced experienced yet? yet? but but on on miss miss mills mills observing, observing, with with despondency, despondency, that that it it were were well well indeed indeed for for some some hearts hearts if if this this were were so, so, i i explained explained that that i i begged begged leave leave to to restrict restrict the the observation observation to to mortals mortals of of the the masculine masculine gender. gender. i i then then put put it it to to miss miss mills, mills, to to say say whether whether she she considered considered that that there there was was or or was was not not any any practical practical merit merit in in the the suggestion suggestion i i had had been been anxious anxious to to make, make, concerning concerning the the accounts, accounts, the the housekeeping, housekeeping, and and the the cookery cookery book? book? miss miss mills, mills, after after some some consideration, consideration, thus thus replied: replied: 'mr. 'mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i will will be be plain plain with with you. mental mental suffering suffering and and trial trial supply, supply, in in some some natures, natures, the the place place of of years, years, and and i i will will be be as as plain plain with with you as as if if i i were were a a lady lady abbess. abbess. no. no. the the suggestion suggestion is is not not appropriate appropriate to to our our dora. dora. our our dearest dearest dora dora is is a a favourite favourite child child of of nature. nature. she she is is a a thing thing of of light, light, and and airiness, airiness, and and joy. joy. i i am am free free to to confess confess that that if if it it could could be be done, done, it it might might be be well, well, but but -- -- ' ' and and miss miss mills mills shook shook her her head. head. i i was was encouraged encouraged by by this this closing closing admission admission on on the the part part of of miss miss mills mills to to ask ask her, her, whether, whether, for for dora's dora's sake, sake, if if she she had had any any opportunity opportunity of of luring luring her her attention attention to to such such preparations preparations for for an an earnest earnest life, life, she she would would avail avail herself herself of of it? it? miss miss mills mills replied replied in in the the affirmative affirmative so so readily, readily, that that i i further further asked asked her her if if she she would would take take charge charge of of the the cookery cookery book; book; and, and, if if she she ever ever could could insinuate insinuate it it upon upon dora's dora's acceptance, acceptance, without without frightening frightening her, her, undertake undertake to to do do me me that that crowning crowning service. service. miss miss mills mills accepted accepted this this trust, trust, too; too; but but was was not not sanguine. sanguine. and and dora dora returned, returned, looking looking such such a a lovely lovely little little creature, creature, that that i i really really doubted doubted whether whether she she ought ought to to be be troubled troubled with with anything anything so so ordinary. ordinary. and and she she loved loved me me so so much, much, and and was was so so captivating captivating (particularly (particularly when when she she made made jip jip stand stand on on his his hind hind legs legs for for toast, toast, and and when when she she pretended pretended to to hold hold that that nose nose of of his his against against the the hot hot teapot teapot for for punishment punishment because because he he wouldn't), wouldn't), that that i i felt felt like like a a sort sort of of monster monster who who had had got got into into a a fairy's fairy's bower, bower, when when i i thought thought of of having having frightened frightened her, her, and and made made her her cry. cry. after after tea tea we we had had the the guitar; guitar; and and dora dora sang sang those those same same dear dear old old french french songs songs about about the the impossibility impossibility of of ever ever on on any any account account leaving leaving off off dancing, dancing, la la ra ra la, la, la la ra ra la, la, until until i i felt felt a a much much greater greater monster monster than than before. before. we we had had only only one one check check to to our our pleasure, pleasure, and and that that happened happened a a little little while while before before i i took took my my leave, leave, when, when, miss miss mills mills chancing chancing to to make make some some allusion allusion to to tomorrow tomorrow morning, morning, i i unluckily unluckily let let out out that, that, being being obliged obliged to to exert exert myself myself now, now, i i got got up up at at five five o'clock. o'clock. whether whether dora dora had had any any idea idea that that i i was was a a private private watchman, watchman, i i am am unable unable to to say; say; but but it it made made a a great great impression impression on on her, her, and and she she neither neither played played nor nor sang sang any any more. more. it it was was still still on on her her mind mind when when i i bade bade her her adieu; adieu; and and she she said said to to me, me, in in her her pretty pretty coaxing coaxing way way -- -- as as if if i i were were a a doll, doll, i i used used to to think: think: 'now 'now don't don't get get up up at at five five o'clock, o'clock, you naughty naughty boy. boy. it's it's so so nonsensical!' nonsensical!' 'my 'my love,' love,' said said i, i, 'i 'i have have work work to to do.' do.' 'but 'but don't don't do do it!' it!' returned returned dora. dora. 'why 'why should should you?' it it was was impossible impossible to to say say to to that that sweet sweet little little surprised surprised face, face, otherwise otherwise than than lightly lightly and and playfully, playfully, that that we we must must work work to to live. live. 'oh! 'oh! how how ridiculous!' ridiculous!' cried cried dora. dora. 'how 'how shall shall we we live live without, without, dora?' dora?' said said i. i. 'how? 'how? any any how!' how!' said said dora. dora. she she seemed seemed to to think think she she had had quite quite settled settled the the question, question, and and gave gave me me such such a a triumphant triumphant little little kiss, kiss, direct direct from from her her innocent innocent heart, heart, that that i i would would hardly hardly have have put put her her out out of of conceit conceit with with her her answer, answer, for for a a fortune. fortune. well! well! i i loved loved her, her, and and i i went went on on loving loving her, her, most most absorbingly, absorbingly, entirely, entirely, and and completely. completely. but but going going on, on, too, too, working working pretty pretty hard, hard, and and busily busily keeping keeping red-hot red-hot all all the the irons irons i i now now had had in in the the fire, fire, i i would would sit sit sometimes sometimes of of a a night, night, opposite opposite my my aunt, aunt, thinking thinking how how i i had had frightened frightened dora dora that that time, time, and and how how i i could could best best make make my my way way with with a a guitar-case guitar-case through through the the forest forest of of difficulty, difficulty, until until i i used used to to fancy fancy that that my my head head was was turning turning quite quite grey. grey. chapter chapter 38. 38. a a dissolution dissolution of of partnership partnership i i did did not not allow allow my my resolution, resolution, with with respect respect to to the the parliamentary parliamentary debates, debates, to to cool. cool. it it was was one one of of the the irons irons i i began began to to heat heat immediately, immediately, and and one one of of the the irons irons i i kept kept hot, hot, and and hammered hammered at, at, with with a a perseverance perseverance i i may may honestly honestly admire. admire. i i bought bought an an approved approved scheme scheme of of the the noble noble art art and and mystery mystery of of stenography stenography (which (which cost cost me me ten ten and and sixpence); sixpence); and and plunged plunged into into a a sea sea of of perplexity perplexity that that brought brought me, me, in in a a few few weeks, weeks, to to the the confines confines of of distraction. distraction. the the changes changes that that were were rung rung upon upon dots, dots, which which in in such such a a position position meant meant such such a a thing, thing, and and in in such such another another position position something something else, else, entirely entirely different; different; the the wonderful wonderful vagaries vagaries that that were were played played by by circles; circles; the the unaccountable unaccountable consequences consequences that that resulted resulted from from marks marks like like flies' flies' legs; legs; the the tremendous tremendous effects effects of of a a curve curve in in a a wrong wrong place; place; not not only only troubled troubled my my waking waking hours, hours, but but reappeared reappeared before before me me in in my my sleep. sleep. when when i i had had groped groped my my way, way, blindly, blindly, through through these these difficulties, difficulties, and and had had mastered mastered the the alphabet, alphabet, which which was was an an egyptian egyptian temple temple in in itself, itself, there there then then appeared appeared a a procession procession of of new new horrors, horrors, called called arbitrary arbitrary characters; characters; the the most most despotic despotic characters characters i i have have ever ever known; known; who who insisted, insisted, for for instance, instance, that that a a thing thing like like the the beginning beginning of of a a cobweb, cobweb, meant meant expectation, expectation, and and that that a a pen-and-ink pen-and-ink sky-rocket, sky-rocket, stood stood for for disadvantageous. disadvantageous. when when i i had had fixed fixed these these wretches wretches in in my my mind, mind, i i found found that that they they had had driven driven everything everything else else out out of of it; it; then, then, beginning beginning again, again, i i forgot forgot them; them; while while i i was was picking picking them them up, up, i i dropped dropped the the other other fragments fragments of of the the system; system; in in short, short, it it was was almost almost heart-breaking. heart-breaking. it it might might have have been been quite quite heart-breaking, heart-breaking, but but for for dora, dora, who who was was the the stay stay and and anchor anchor of of my my tempest-driven tempest-driven bark. bark. every every scratch scratch in in the the scheme scheme was was a a gnarled gnarled oak oak in in the the forest forest of of difficulty, difficulty, and and i i went went on on cutting cutting them them down, down, one one after after another, another, with with such such vigour, vigour, that that in in three three or or four four months months i i was was in in a a condition condition to to make make an an experiment experiment on on one one of of our our crack crack speakers speakers in in the the commons. commons. shall shall i i ever ever forget forget how how the the crack crack speaker speaker walked walked off off from from me me before before i i began, began, and and left left my my imbecile imbecile pencil pencil staggering staggering about about the the paper paper as as if if it it were were in in a a fit! fit! this this would would not not do, do, it it was was quite quite clear. clear. i i was was flying flying too too high, high, and and should should never never get get on, on, so. so. i i resorted resorted to to traddles traddles for for advice; advice; who who suggested suggested that that he he should should dictate dictate speeches speeches to to me, me, at at a a pace, pace, and and with with occasional occasional stoppages, stoppages, adapted adapted to to my my weakness. weakness. very very grateful grateful for for this this friendly friendly aid, aid, i i accepted accepted the the proposal; proposal; and and night night after after night, night, almost almost every every night, night, for for a a long long time, time, we we had had a a sort sort of of private private parliament parliament in in buckingham buckingham street, street, after after i i came came home home from from the the doctor's. doctor's. i i should should like like to to see see such such a a parliament parliament anywhere anywhere else! else! my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. dick dick represented represented the the government government or or the the opposition opposition (as (as the the case case might might be), be), and and traddles, traddles, with with the the assistance assistance of of enfield's enfield's speakers, speakers, or or a a volume volume of of parliamentary parliamentary orations, orations, thundered thundered astonishing astonishing invectives invectives against against them. them. standing standing by by the the table, table, with with his his finger finger in in the the page page to to keep keep the the place, place, and and his his right right arm arm flourishing flourishing above above his his head, head, traddles, traddles, as as mr. mr. pitt, pitt, mr. mr. fox, fox, mr. mr. sheridan, sheridan, mr. mr. burke, burke, lord lord castlereagh, castlereagh, viscount viscount sidmouth, sidmouth, or or mr. mr. canning, canning, would would work work himself himself into into the the most most violent violent heats, heats, and and deliver deliver the the most most withering withering denunciations denunciations of of the the profligacy profligacy and and corruption corruption of of my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. dick; dick; while while i i used used to to sit, sit, at at a a little little distance, distance, with with my my notebook notebook on on my my knee, knee, fagging fagging after after him him with with all all my my might might and and main. main. the the inconsistency inconsistency and and recklessness recklessness of of traddles traddles were were not not to to be be exceeded exceeded by by any any real real politician. politician. he he was was for for any any description description of of policy, policy, in in the the compass compass of of a a week; week; and and nailed nailed all all sorts sorts of of colours colours to to every every denomination denomination of of mast. mast. my my aunt, aunt, looking looking very very like like an an immovable immovable chancellor chancellor of of the the exchequer, exchequer, would would occasionally occasionally throw throw in in an an interruption interruption or or two, two, as as 'hear!' 'hear!' or or 'no!' 'no!' or or 'oh!' 'oh!' when when the the text text seemed seemed to to require require it: it: which which was was always always a a signal signal to to mr. mr. dick dick (a (a perfect perfect country country gentleman) gentleman) to to follow follow lustily lustily with with the the same same cry. cry. but but mr. mr. dick dick got got taxed taxed with with such such things things in in the the course course of of his his parliamentary parliamentary career, career, and and was was made made responsible responsible for for such such awful awful consequences, consequences, that that he he became became uncomfortable uncomfortable in in his his mind mind sometimes. sometimes. i i believe believe he he actually actually began began to to be be afraid afraid he he really really had had been been doing doing something, something, tending tending to to the the annihilation annihilation of of the the british british constitution, constitution, and and the the ruin ruin of of the the country. country. often often and and often often we we pursued pursued these these debates debates until until the the clock clock pointed pointed to to midnight, midnight, and and the the candles candles were were burning burning down. down. the the result result of of so so much much good good practice practice was, was, that that by by and and by by i i began began to to keep keep pace pace with with traddles traddles pretty pretty well, well, and and should should have have been been quite quite triumphant triumphant if if i i had had had had the the least least idea idea what what my my notes notes were were about. about. but, but, as as to to reading reading them them after after i i had had got got them, them, i i might might as as well well have have copied copied the the chinese chinese inscriptions inscriptions of of an an immense immense collection collection of of tea-chests, tea-chests, or or the the golden golden characters characters on on all all the the great great red red and and green green bottles bottles in in the the chemists' chemists' shops! shops! there there was was nothing nothing for for it, it, but but to to turn turn back back and and begin begin all all over over again. again. it it was was very very hard, hard, but but i i turned turned back, back, though though with with a a heavy heavy heart, heart, and and began began laboriously laboriously and and methodically methodically to to plod plod over over the the same same tedious tedious ground ground at at a a snail's snail's pace; pace; stopping stopping to to examine examine minutely minutely every every speck speck in in the the way, way, on on all all sides, sides, and and making making the the most most desperate desperate efforts efforts to to know know these these elusive elusive characters characters by by sight sight wherever wherever i i met met them. them. i i was was always always punctual punctual at at the the office; office; at at the the doctor's doctor's too: too: and and i i really really did did work, work, as as the the common common expression expression is, is, like like a a cart-horse. cart-horse. one one day, day, when when i i went went to to the the commons commons as as usual, usual, i i found found mr. mr. spenlow spenlow in in the the doorway doorway looking looking extremely extremely grave, grave, and and talking talking to to himself. himself. as as he he was was in in the the habit habit of of complaining complaining of of pains pains in in his his head head -- -- he he had had naturally naturally a a short short throat, throat, and and i i do do seriously seriously believe believe he he over-starched over-starched himself himself -- -- i i was was at at first first alarmed alarmed by by the the idea idea that that he he was was not not quite quite right right in in that that direction; direction; but but he he soon soon relieved relieved my my uneasiness. uneasiness. instead instead of of returning returning my my 'good 'good morning' morning' with with his his usual usual affability, affability, he he looked looked at at me me in in a a distant, distant, ceremonious ceremonious manner, manner, and and coldly coldly requested requested me me to to accompany accompany him him to to a a certain certain coffee-house, coffee-house, which, which, in in those those days, days, had had a a door door opening opening into into the the commons, commons, just just within within the the little little archway archway in in st. st. paul's paul's churchyard. churchyard. i i complied, complied, in in a a very very uncomfortable uncomfortable state, state, and and with with a a warm warm shooting shooting all all over over me, me, as as if if my my apprehensions apprehensions were were breaking breaking out out into into buds. buds. when when i i allowed allowed him him to to go go on on a a little little before, before, on on account account of of the the narrowness narrowness of of the the way, way, i i observed observed that that he he carried carried his his head head with with a a lofty lofty air air that that was was particularly particularly unpromising; unpromising; and and my my mind mind misgave misgave me me that that he he had had found found out out about about my my darling darling dora. dora. if if i i had had not not guessed guessed this, this, on on the the way way to to the the coffee-house, coffee-house, i i could could hardly hardly have have failed failed to to know know what what was was the the matter matter when when i i followed followed him him into into an an upstairs upstairs room, room, and and found found miss miss murdstone murdstone there, there, supported supported by by a a background background of of sideboard, sideboard, on on which which were were several several inverted inverted tumblers tumblers sustaining sustaining lemons, lemons, and and two two of of those those extraordinary extraordinary boxes, boxes, all all corners corners and and flutings, flutings, for for sticking sticking knives knives and and forks forks in, in, which, which, happily happily for for mankind, mankind, are are now now obsolete. obsolete. miss miss murdstone murdstone gave gave me me her her chilly chilly finger-nails, finger-nails, and and sat sat severely severely rigid. rigid. mr. mr. spenlow spenlow shut shut the the door, door, motioned motioned me me to to a a chair, chair, and and stood stood on on the the hearth-rug hearth-rug in in front front of of the the fireplace. fireplace. 'have 'have the the goodness goodness to to show show mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, what what you have have in in your your reticule, reticule, miss miss murdstone.' murdstone.' i i believe believe it it was was the the old old identical identical steel-clasped steel-clasped reticule reticule of of my my childhood, childhood, that that shut shut up up like like a a bite. bite. compressing compressing her her lips, lips, in in sympathy sympathy with with the the snap, snap, miss miss murdstone murdstone opened opened it it -- -- opening opening her her mouth mouth a a little little at at the the same same time time -- -- and and produced produced my my last last letter letter to to dora, dora, teeming teeming with with expressions expressions of of devoted devoted affection. affection. 'i 'i believe believe that that is is your your writing, writing, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. i i was was very very hot, hot, and and the the voice voice i i heard heard was was very very unlike unlike mine, mine, when when i i said, said, 'it 'it is, is, sir!' sir!' 'if 'if i i am am not not mistaken,' mistaken,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, as as miss miss murdstone murdstone brought brought a a parcel parcel of of letters letters out out of of her her reticule, reticule, tied tied round round with with the the dearest dearest bit bit of of blue blue ribbon, ribbon, 'those 'those are are also also from from your your pen, pen, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' i i took took them them from from her her with with a a most most desolate desolate sensation; sensation; and, and, glancing glancing at at such such phrases phrases at at the the top, top, as as 'my 'my ever ever dearest dearest and and own own dora,' dora,' 'my 'my best best beloved beloved angel,' angel,' 'my 'my blessed blessed one one for for ever,' ever,' and and the the like, like, blushed blushed deeply, deeply, and and inclined inclined my my head. head. 'no, 'no, thank thank you!' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, coldly, coldly, as as i i mechanically mechanically offered offered them them back back to to him. him. 'i 'i will will not not deprive deprive you of of them. them. miss miss murdstone, murdstone, be be so so good good as as to to proceed!' proceed!' that that gentle gentle creature, creature, after after a a moment's moment's thoughtful thoughtful survey survey of of the the carpet, carpet, delivered delivered herself herself with with much much dry dry unction unction as as follows. follows. 'i 'i must must confess confess to to having having entertained entertained my my suspicions suspicions of of miss miss spenlow, spenlow, in in reference reference to to david david copperfield, copperfield, for for some some time. time. i i observed observed miss miss spenlow spenlow and and david david copperfield, copperfield, when when they they first first met; met; and and the the impression impression made made upon upon me me then then was was not not agreeable. agreeable. the the depravity depravity of of the the human human heart heart is is such such -- -- ' ' 'you will will oblige oblige me, me, ma'am,' ma'am,' interrupted interrupted mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, 'by 'by confining confining yourself yourself to to facts.' facts.' miss miss murdstone murdstone cast cast down down her her eyes, eyes, shook shook her her head head as as if if protesting protesting against against this this unseemly unseemly interruption, interruption, and and with with frowning frowning dignity dignity resumed: resumed: 'since 'since i i am am to to confine confine myself myself to to facts, facts, i i will will state state them them as as dryly dryly as as i i can. can. perhaps perhaps that that will will be be considered considered an an acceptable acceptable course course of of proceeding. proceeding. i i have have already already said, said, sir, sir, that that i i have have had had my my suspicions suspicions of of miss miss spenlow, spenlow, in in reference reference to to david david copperfield, copperfield, for for some some time. time. i i have have frequently frequently endeavoured endeavoured to to find find decisive decisive corroboration corroboration of of those those suspicions, suspicions, but but without without effect. effect. i i have have therefore therefore forborne forborne to to mention mention them them to to miss miss spenlow's spenlow's father'; father'; looking looking severely severely at at him him -- -- 'knowing 'knowing how how little little disposition disposition there there usually usually is is in in such such cases, cases, to to acknowledge acknowledge the the conscientious conscientious discharge discharge of of duty.' duty.' mr. mr. spenlow spenlow seemed seemed quite quite cowed cowed by by the the gentlemanly gentlemanly sternness sternness of of miss miss murdstone's murdstone's manner, manner, and and deprecated deprecated her her severity severity with with a a conciliatory conciliatory little little wave wave of of his his hand. hand. 'on 'on my my return return to to norwood, norwood, after after the the period period of of absence absence occasioned occasioned by by my my brother's brother's marriage,' marriage,' pursued pursued miss miss murdstone murdstone in in a a disdainful disdainful voice, voice, 'and 'and on on the the return return of of miss miss spenlow spenlow from from her her visit visit to to her her friend friend miss miss mills, mills, i i imagined imagined that that the the manner manner of of miss miss spenlow spenlow gave gave me me greater greater occasion occasion for for suspicion suspicion than than before. before. therefore therefore i i watched watched miss miss spenlow spenlow closely.' closely.' dear, dear, tender tender little little dora, dora, so so unconscious unconscious of of this this dragon's dragon's eye! eye! 'still,' 'still,' resumed resumed miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'i 'i found found no no proof proof until until last last night. night. it it appeared appeared to to me me that that miss miss spenlow spenlow received received too too many many letters letters from from her her friend friend miss miss mills; mills; but but miss miss mills mills being being her her friend friend with with her her father's father's full full concurrence,' concurrence,' another another telling telling blow blow at at mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, 'it 'it was was not not for for me me to to interfere. interfere. if if i i may may not not be be permitted permitted to to allude allude to to the the natural natural depravity depravity of of the the human human heart, heart, at at least least i i may may -- -- i i must must -- -- be be permitted, permitted, so so far far to to refer refer to to misplaced misplaced confidence.' confidence.' mr. mr. spenlow spenlow apologetically apologetically murmured murmured his his assent. assent. 'last 'last evening evening after after tea,' tea,' pursued pursued miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'i 'i observed observed the the little little dog dog starting, starting, rolling, rolling, and and growling growling about about the the drawing-room, drawing-room, worrying worrying something. something. i i said said to to miss miss spenlow, spenlow, "dora, "dora, what what is is that that the the dog dog has has in in his his mouth? mouth? it's it's paper." paper." miss miss spenlow spenlow immediately immediately put put her her hand hand to to her her frock, frock, gave gave a a sudden sudden cry, cry, and and ran ran to to the the dog. dog. i i interposed, interposed, and and said, said, "dora, "dora, my my love, love, you must must permit permit me."' me."' oh oh jip, jip, miserable miserable spaniel, spaniel, this this wretchedness, wretchedness, then, then, was was your your work! work! 'miss 'miss spenlow spenlow endeavoured,' endeavoured,' said said miss miss murdstone, murdstone, 'to 'to bribe bribe me me with with kisses, kisses, work-boxes, work-boxes, and and small small articles articles of of jewellery jewellery -- -- that, that, of of course, course, i i pass pass over. over. the the little little dog dog retreated retreated under under the the sofa sofa on on my my approaching approaching him, him, and and was was with with great great difficulty difficulty dislodged dislodged by by the the fire-irons. fire-irons. even even when when dislodged, dislodged, he he still still kept kept the the letter letter in in his his mouth; mouth; and and on on my my endeavouring endeavouring to to take take it it from from him, him, at at the the imminent imminent risk risk of of being being bitten, bitten, he he kept kept it it between between his his teeth teeth so so pertinaciously pertinaciously as as to to suffer suffer himself himself to to be be held held suspended suspended in in the the air air by by means means of of the the document. document. at at length length i i obtained obtained possession possession of of it. it. after after perusing perusing it, it, i i taxed taxed miss miss spenlow spenlow with with having having many many such such letters letters in in her her possession; possession; and and ultimately ultimately obtained obtained from from her her the the packet packet which which is is now now in in david david copperfield's copperfield's hand.' hand.' here here she she ceased; ceased; and and snapping snapping her her reticule reticule again, again, and and shutting shutting her her mouth, mouth, looked looked as as if if she she might might be be broken, broken, but but could could never never be be bent. bent. 'you have have heard heard miss miss murdstone,' murdstone,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, turning turning to to me. me. 'i 'i beg beg to to ask, ask, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, if if you have have anything anything to to say say in in reply?' reply?' the the picture picture i i had had before before me, me, of of the the beautiful beautiful little little treasure treasure of of my my heart, heart, sobbing sobbing and and crying crying all all night night -- -- of of her her being being alone, alone, frightened, frightened, and and wretched, wretched, then then -- -- of of her her having having so so piteously piteously begged begged and and prayed prayed that that stony-hearted stony-hearted woman woman to to forgive forgive her her -- -- of of her her having having vainly vainly offered offered her her those those kisses, kisses, work-boxes, work-boxes, and and trinkets trinkets -- -- of of her her being being in in such such grievous grievous distress, distress, and and all all for for me me -- -- very very much much impaired impaired the the little little dignity dignity i i had had been been able able to to muster. muster. i i am am afraid afraid i i was was in in a a tremulous tremulous state state for for a a minute minute or or so, so, though though i i did did my my best best to to disguise disguise it. it. 'there 'there is is nothing nothing i i can can say, say, sir,' sir,' i i returned, returned, 'except 'except that that all all the the blame blame is is mine. mine. dora dora -- -- ' ' 'miss 'miss spenlow, spenlow, if if you please,' please,' said said her her father, father, majestically. majestically. ' ' -- -- was was induced induced and and persuaded persuaded by by me,' me,' i i went went on, on, swallowing swallowing that that colder colder designation, designation, 'to 'to consent consent to to this this concealment, concealment, and and i i bitterly bitterly regret regret it.' it.' 'you are are very very much much to to blame, blame, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, walking walking to to and and fro fro upon upon the the hearth-rug, hearth-rug, and and emphasizing emphasizing what what he he said said with with his his whole whole body body instead instead of of his his head, head, on on account account of of the the stiffness stiffness of of his his cravat cravat and and spine. spine. 'you have have done done a a stealthy stealthy and and unbecoming unbecoming action, action, mr. mr. copperfield. copperfield. when when i i take take a a gentleman gentleman to to my my house, house, no no matter matter whether whether he he is is nineteen, nineteen, twenty-nine, twenty-nine, or or ninety, ninety, i i take take him him there there in in a a spirit spirit of of confidence. confidence. if if he he abuses abuses my my confidence, confidence, he he commits commits a a dishonourable dishonourable action, action, mr. mr. copperfield.' copperfield.' 'i 'i feel feel it, it, sir, sir, i i assure assure you,' i i returned. returned. 'but 'but i i never never thought thought so, so, before. before. sincerely, sincerely, honestly, honestly, indeed, indeed, mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, i i never never thought thought so, so, before. before. i i love love miss miss spenlow spenlow to to that that extent extent -- -- ' ' 'pooh! 'pooh! nonsense!' nonsense!' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, reddening. reddening. 'pray 'pray don't don't tell tell me me to to my my face face that that you love love my my daughter, daughter, mr. mr. copperfield!' copperfield!' 'could 'could i i defend defend my my conduct conduct if if i i did did not, not, sir?' sir?' i i returned, returned, with with all all humility. humility. 'can 'can you defend defend your your conduct conduct if if you do, do, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, stopping stopping short short upon upon the the hearth-rug. hearth-rug. 'have 'have you considered considered your your years, years, and and my my daughter's daughter's years, years, mr. mr. copperfield? copperfield? have have you considered considered what what it it is is to to undermine undermine the the confidence confidence that that should should subsist subsist between between my my daughter daughter and and myself? myself? have have you considered considered my my daughter's daughter's station station in in life, life, the the projects projects i i may may contemplate contemplate for for her her advancement, advancement, the the testamentary testamentary intentions intentions i i may may have have with with reference reference to to her? her? have have you considered considered anything, anything, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' 'very 'very little, little, sir, sir, i i am am afraid;' afraid;' i i answered, answered, speaking speaking to to him him as as respectfully respectfully and and sorrowfully sorrowfully as as i i felt; felt; 'but 'but pray pray believe believe me, me, i i have have considered considered my my own own worldly worldly position. position. when when i i explained explained it it to to you, we we were were already already engaged engaged -- -- ' ' 'i 'i beg,' beg,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, more more like like punch punch than than i i had had ever ever seen seen him, him, as as he he energetically energetically struck struck one one hand hand upon upon the the other other -- -- i i could could not not help help noticing noticing that that even even in in my my despair; despair; 'that 'that you will will not not talk talk to to me me of of engagements, engagements, mr. mr. copperfield!' copperfield!' the the otherwise otherwise immovable immovable miss miss murdstone murdstone laughed laughed contemptuously contemptuously in in one one short short syllable. syllable. 'when 'when i i explained explained my my altered altered position position to to you, sir,' sir,' i i began began again, again, substituting substituting a a new new form form of of expression expression for for what what was was so so unpalatable unpalatable to to him, him, 'this 'this concealment, concealment, into into which which i i am am so so unhappy unhappy as as to to have have led led miss miss spenlow, spenlow, had had begun. begun. since since i i have have been been in in that that altered altered position, position, i i have have strained strained every every nerve, nerve, i i have have exerted exerted every every energy, energy, to to improve improve it. it. i i am am sure sure i i shall shall improve improve it it in in time. time. will will you grant grant me me time time -- -- any any length length of of time? time? we we are are both both so so young, young, sir, sir, -- -- ' ' 'you are are right,' right,' interrupted interrupted mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, nodding nodding his his head head a a great great many many times, times, and and frowning frowning very very much, much, 'you are are both both very very young. young. it's it's all all nonsense. nonsense. let let there there be be an an end end of of the the nonsense. nonsense. take take away away those those letters, letters, and and throw throw them them in in the the fire. fire. give give me me miss miss spenlow's spenlow's letters letters to to throw throw in in the the fire; fire; and and although although our our future future intercourse intercourse must, must, you are are aware, aware, be be restricted restricted to to the the commons commons here, here, we we will will agree agree to to make make no no further further mention mention of of the the past. past. come, come, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, you don't don't want want sense; sense; and and this this is is the the sensible sensible course.' course.' no. no. i i couldn't couldn't think think of of agreeing agreeing to to it. it. i i was was very very sorry, sorry, but but there there was was a a higher higher consideration consideration than than sense. sense. love love was was above above all all earthly earthly considerations, considerations, and and i i loved loved dora dora to to idolatry, idolatry, and and dora dora loved loved me. me. i i didn't didn't exactly exactly say say so; so; i i softened softened it it down down as as much much as as i i could; could; but but i i implied implied it, it, and and i i was was resolute resolute upon upon it. it. i i don't don't think think i i made made myself myself very very ridiculous, ridiculous, but but i i know know i i was was resolute. resolute. 'very 'very well, well, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, 'i 'i must must try try my my influence influence with with my my daughter.' daughter.' miss miss murdstone, murdstone, by by an an expressive expressive sound, sound, a a long long drawn drawn respiration, respiration, which which was was neither neither a a sigh sigh nor nor a a moan, moan, but but was was like like both, both, gave gave it it as as her her opinion opinion that that he he should should have have done done this this at at first. first. 'i 'i must must try,' try,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, confirmed confirmed by by this this support, support, 'my 'my influence influence with with my my daughter. daughter. do do you decline decline to to take take those those letters, letters, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' for for i i had had laid laid them them on on the the table. table. yes. yes. i i told told him him i i hoped hoped he he would would not not think think it it wrong, wrong, but but i i couldn't couldn't possibly possibly take take them them from from miss miss murdstone. murdstone. 'nor 'nor from from me?' me?' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. no, no, i i replied replied with with the the profoundest profoundest respect; respect; nor nor from from him. him. 'very 'very well!' well!' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. a a silence silence succeeding, succeeding, i i was was undecided undecided whether whether to to go go or or stay. stay. at at length length i i was was moving moving quietly quietly towards towards the the door, door, with with the the intention intention of of saying saying that that perhaps perhaps i i should should consult consult his his feelings feelings best best by by withdrawing: withdrawing: when when he he said, said, with with his his hands hands in in his his coat coat pockets, pockets, into into which which it it was was as as much much as as he he could could do do to to get get them; them; and and with with what what i i should should call, call, upon upon the the whole, whole, a a decidedly decidedly pious pious air: air: 'you are are probably probably aware, aware, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that i i am am not not altogether altogether destitute destitute of of worldly worldly possessions, possessions, and and that that my my daughter daughter is is my my nearest nearest and and dearest dearest relative?' relative?' i i hurriedly hurriedly made made him him a a reply reply to to the the effect, effect, that that i i hoped hoped the the error error into into which which i i had had been been betrayed betrayed by by the the desperate desperate nature nature of of my my love, love, did did not not induce induce him him to to think think me me mercenary mercenary too? too? 'i 'i don't don't allude allude to to the the matter matter in in that that light,' light,' said said mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'it 'it would would be be better better for for yourself, yourself, and and all all of of us, us, if if you were were mercenary, mercenary, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield -- -- i i mean, mean, if if you were were more more discreet discreet and and less less influenced influenced by by all all this this youthful youthful nonsense. nonsense. no. no. i i merely merely say, say, with with quite quite another another view, view, you are are probably probably aware aware i i have have some some property property to to bequeath bequeath to to my my child?' child?' i i certainly certainly supposed supposed so. so. 'and 'and you can can hardly hardly think,' think,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, 'having 'having experience experience of of what what we we see, see, in in the the commons commons here, here, every every day, day, of of the the various various unaccountable unaccountable and and negligent negligent proceedings proceedings of of men, men, in in respect respect of of their their testamentary testamentary arrangements arrangements -- -- of of all all subjects, subjects, the the one one on on which which perhaps perhaps the the strangest strangest revelations revelations of of human human inconsistency inconsistency are are to to be be met met with with -- -- but but that that mine mine are are made?' made?' i i inclined inclined my my head head in in acquiescence. acquiescence. 'i 'i should should not not allow,' allow,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, with with an an evident evident increase increase of of pious pious sentiment, sentiment, and and slowly slowly shaking shaking his his head head as as he he poised poised himself himself upon upon his his toes toes and and heels heels alternately, alternately, 'my 'my suitable suitable provision provision for for my my child child to to be be influenced influenced by by a a piece piece of of youthful youthful folly folly like like the the present. present. it it is is mere mere folly. folly. mere mere nonsense. nonsense. in in a a little little while, while, it it will will weigh weigh lighter lighter than than any any feather. feather. but but i i might might -- -- i i might might -- -- if if this this silly silly business business were were not not completely completely relinquished relinquished altogether, altogether, be be induced induced in in some some anxious anxious moment moment to to guard guard her her from, from, and and surround surround her her with with protections protections against, against, the the consequences consequences of of any any foolish foolish step step in in the the way way of of marriage. marriage. now, now, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i hope hope that that you will will not not render render it it necessary necessary for for me me to to open, open, even even for for a a quarter quarter of of an an hour, hour, that that closed closed page page in in the the book book of of life, life, and and unsettle, unsettle, even even for for a a quarter quarter of of an an hour, hour, grave grave affairs affairs long long since since composed.' composed.' there there was was a a serenity, serenity, a a tranquillity, tranquillity, a a calm calm sunset sunset air air about about him, him, which which quite quite affected affected me. me. he he was was so so peaceful peaceful and and resigned resigned -- -- clearly clearly had had his his affairs affairs in in such such perfect perfect train, train, and and so so systematically systematically wound wound up up -- -- that that he he was was a a man man to to feel feel touched touched in in the the contemplation contemplation of. of. i i really really think think i i saw saw tears tears rise rise to to his his eyes, eyes, from from the the depth depth of of his his own own feeling feeling of of all all this. this. but but what what could could i i do? do? i i could could not not deny deny dora dora and and my my own own heart. heart. when when he he told told me me i i had had better better take take a a week week to to consider consider of of what what he he had had said, said, how how could could i i say say i i wouldn't wouldn't take take a a week, week, yet yet how how could could i i fail fail to to know know that that no no amount amount of of weeks weeks could could influence influence such such love love as as mine? mine? 'in 'in the the meantime, meantime, confer confer with with miss miss trotwood, trotwood, or or with with any any person person with with any any knowledge knowledge of of life,' life,' said said mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, adjusting adjusting his his cravat cravat with with both both hands. hands. 'take 'take a a week, week, mr. mr. copperfield.' copperfield.' i i submitted; submitted; and, and, with with a a countenance countenance as as expressive expressive as as i i was was able able to to make make it it of of dejected dejected and and despairing despairing constancy, constancy, came came out out of of the the room. room. miss miss murdstone's murdstone's heavy heavy eyebrows eyebrows followed followed me me to to the the door door -- -- i i say say her her eyebrows eyebrows rather rather than than her her eyes, eyes, because because they they were were much much more more important important in in her her face face -- -- and and she she looked looked so so exactly exactly as as she she used used to to look, look, at at about about that that hour hour of of the the morning, morning, in in our our parlour parlour at at blunderstone, blunderstone, that that i i could could have have fancied fancied i i had had been been breaking breaking down down in in my my lessons lessons again, again, and and that that the the dead dead weight weight on on my my mind mind was was that that horrible horrible old old spelling-book, spelling-book, with with oval oval woodcuts, woodcuts, shaped, shaped, to to my my youthful youthful fancy, fancy, like like the the glasses glasses out out of of spectacles. spectacles. when when i i got got to to the the office, office, and, and, shutting shutting out out old old tiffey tiffey and and the the rest rest of of them them with with my my hands, hands, sat sat at at my my desk, desk, in in my my own own particular particular nook, nook, thinking thinking of of this this earthquake earthquake that that had had taken taken place place so so unexpectedly, unexpectedly, and and in in the the bitterness bitterness of of my my spirit spirit cursing cursing jip, jip, i i fell fell into into such such a a state state of of torment torment about about dora, dora, that that i i wonder wonder i i did did not not take take up up my my hat hat and and rush rush insanely insanely to to norwood. norwood. the the idea idea of of their their frightening frightening her, her, and and making making her her cry, cry, and and of of my my not not being being there there to to comfort comfort her, her, was was so so excruciating, excruciating, that that it it impelled impelled me me to to write write a a wild wild letter letter to to mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, beseeching beseeching him him not not to to visit visit upon upon her her the the consequences consequences of of my my awful awful destiny. destiny. i i implored implored him him to to spare spare her her gentle gentle nature nature -- -- not not to to crush crush a a fragile fragile flower flower -- -- and and addressed addressed him him generally, generally, to to the the best best of of my my remembrance, remembrance, as as if, if, instead instead of of being being her her father, father, he he had had been been an an ogre, ogre, or or the the dragon dragon of of wantley. wantley. this this letter letter i i sealed sealed and and laid laid upon upon his his desk desk before before he he returned; returned; and and when when he he came came in, in, i i saw saw him, him, through through the the half-opened half-opened door door of of his his room, room, take take it it up up and and read read it. it. he he said said nothing nothing about about it it all all the the morning; morning; but but before before he he went went away away in in the the afternoon afternoon he he called called me me in, in, and and told told me me that that i i need need not not make make myself myself at at all all uneasy uneasy about about his his daughter's daughter's happiness. happiness. he he had had assured assured her, her, he he said, said, that that it it was was all all nonsense; nonsense; and and he he had had nothing nothing more more to to say say to to her. her. he he believed believed he he was was an an indulgent indulgent father father (as (as indeed indeed he he was), was), and and i i might might spare spare myself myself any any solicitude solicitude on on her her account. account. 'you may may make make it it necessary, necessary, if if you are are foolish foolish or or obstinate, obstinate, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' he he observed, observed, 'for 'for me me to to send send my my daughter daughter abroad abroad again, again, for for a a term; term; but but i i have have a a better better opinion opinion of of you. i i hope hope you will will be be wiser wiser than than that, that, in in a a few few days. days. as as to to miss miss murdstone,' murdstone,' for for i i had had alluded alluded to to her her in in the the letter, letter, 'i 'i respect respect that that lady's lady's vigilance, vigilance, and and feel feel obliged obliged to to her; her; but but she she has has strict strict charge charge to to avoid avoid the the subject. subject. all all i i desire, desire, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, is, is, that that it it should should be be forgotten. forgotten. all all you have have got got to to do, do, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, is is to to forget forget it.' it.' all! all! in in the the note note i i wrote wrote to to miss miss mills, mills, i i bitterly bitterly quoted quoted this this sentiment. sentiment. all all i i had had to to do, do, i i said, said, with with gloomy gloomy sarcasm, sarcasm, was was to to forget forget dora. dora. that that was was all, all, and and what what was was that! that! i i entreated entreated miss miss mills mills to to see see me, me, that that evening. evening. if if it it could could not not be be done done with with mr. mr. mills's mills's sanction sanction and and concurrence, concurrence, i i besought besought a a clandestine clandestine interview interview in in the the back back kitchen kitchen where where the the mangle mangle was. was. i i informed informed her her that that my my reason reason was was tottering tottering on on its its throne, throne, and and only only she, she, miss miss mills, mills, could could prevent prevent its its being being deposed. deposed. i i signed signed myself, myself, hers hers distractedly; distractedly; and and i i couldn't couldn't help help feeling, feeling, while while i i read read this this composition composition over, over, before before sending sending it it by by a a porter, porter, that that it it was was something something in in the the style style of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. however, however, i i sent sent it. it. at at night night i i repaired repaired to to miss miss mills's mills's street, street, and and walked walked up up and and down, down, until until i i was was stealthily stealthily fetched fetched in in by by miss miss mills's mills's maid, maid, and and taken taken the the area area way way to to the the back back kitchen. kitchen. i i have have since since seen seen reason reason to to believe believe that that there there was was nothing nothing on on earth earth to to prevent prevent my my going going in in at at the the front front door, door, and and being being shown shown up up into into the the drawing-room, drawing-room, except except miss miss mills's mills's love love of of the the romantic romantic and and mysterious. mysterious. in in the the back back kitchen, kitchen, i i raved raved as as became became me. me. i i went went there, there, i i suppose, suppose, to to make make a a fool fool of of myself, myself, and and i i am am quite quite sure sure i i did did it. it. miss miss mills mills had had received received a a hasty hasty note note from from dora, dora, telling telling her her that that all all was was discovered, discovered, and and saying. saying. 'oh 'oh pray pray come come to to me, me, julia, julia, do, do, do!' do!' but but miss miss mills, mills, mistrusting mistrusting the the acceptability acceptability of of her her presence presence to to the the higher higher powers, powers, had had not not yet yet gone; gone; and and we we were were all all benighted benighted in in the the desert desert of of sahara. sahara. miss miss mills mills had had a a wonderful wonderful flow flow of of words, words, and and liked liked to to pour pour them them out. out. i i could could not not help help feeling, feeling, though though she she mingled mingled her her tears tears with with mine, mine, that that she she had had a a dreadful dreadful luxury luxury in in our our afflictions. afflictions. she she petted petted them, them, as as i i may may say, say, and and made made the the most most of of them. them. a a deep deep gulf, gulf, she she observed, observed, had had opened opened between between dora dora and and me, me, and and love love could could only only span span it it with with its its rainbow. rainbow. love love must must suffer suffer in in this this stern stern world; world; it it ever ever had had been been so, so, it it ever ever would would be be so. so. no no matter, matter, miss miss mills mills remarked. remarked. hearts hearts confined confined by by cobwebs cobwebs would would burst burst at at last, last, and and then then love love was was avenged. avenged. this this was was small small consolation, consolation, but but miss miss mills mills wouldn't wouldn't encourage encourage fallacious fallacious hopes. hopes. she she made made me me much much more more wretched wretched than than i i was was before, before, and and i i felt felt (and (and told told her her with with the the deepest deepest gratitude) gratitude) that that she she was was indeed indeed a a friend. friend. we we resolved resolved that that she she should should go go to to dora dora the the first first thing thing in in the the morning, morning, and and find find some some means means of of assuring assuring her, her, either either by by looks looks or or words, words, of of my my devotion devotion and and misery. misery. we we parted, parted, overwhelmed overwhelmed with with grief; grief; and and i i think think miss miss mills mills enjoyed enjoyed herself herself completely. completely. i i confided confided all all to to my my aunt aunt when when i i got got home; home; and and in in spite spite of of all all she she could could say say to to me, me, went went to to bed bed despairing. despairing. i i got got up up despairing, despairing, and and went went out out despairing. despairing. it it was was saturday saturday morning, morning, and and i i went went straight straight to to the the commons. commons. i i was was surprised, surprised, when when i i came came within within sight sight of of our our office-door, office-door, to to see see the the ticket-porters ticket-porters standing standing outside outside talking talking together, together, and and some some half-dozen half-dozen stragglers stragglers gazing gazing at at the the windows windows which which were were shut shut up. up. i i quickened quickened my my pace, pace, and, and, passing passing among among them, them, wondering wondering at at their their looks, looks, went went hurriedly hurriedly in. in. the the clerks clerks were were there, there, but but nobody nobody was was doing doing anything. anything. old old tiffey, tiffey, for for the the first first time time in in his his life life i i should should think, think, was was sitting sitting on on somebody somebody else's else's stool, stool, and and had had not not hung hung up up his his hat. hat. 'this 'this is is a a dreadful dreadful calamity, calamity, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said he, he, as as i i entered. entered. 'what 'what is?' is?' i i exclaimed. exclaimed. 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' 'don't 'don't you know?' know?' cried cried tiffey, tiffey, and and all all the the rest rest of of them, them, coming coming round round me. me. 'no!' 'no!' said said i, i, looking looking from from face face to to face. face. 'mr. 'mr. spenlow,' spenlow,' said said tiffey. tiffey. 'what 'what about about him!' him!' 'dead!' 'dead!' i i thought thought it it was was the the office office reeling, reeling, and and not not i, i, as as one one of of the the clerks clerks caught caught hold hold of of me. me. they they sat sat me me down down in in a a chair, chair, untied untied my my neck-cloth, neck-cloth, and and brought brought me me some some water. water. i i have have no no idea idea whether whether this this took took any any time. time. 'dead?' 'dead?' said said i. i. 'he 'he dined dined in in town town yesterday, yesterday, and and drove drove down down in in the the phaeton phaeton by by himself,' himself,' said said tiffey, tiffey, 'having 'having sent sent his his own own groom groom home home by by the the coach, coach, as as he he sometimes sometimes did, did, you know know -- -- ' ' 'well?' 'well?' 'the 'the phaeton phaeton went went home home without without him. him. the the horses horses stopped stopped at at the the stable-gate. stable-gate. the the man man went went out out with with a a lantern. lantern. nobody nobody in in the the carriage.' carriage.' 'had 'had they they run run away?' away?' 'they 'they were were not not hot,' hot,' said said tiffey, tiffey, putting putting on on his his glasses; glasses; 'no 'no hotter, hotter, i i understand, understand, than than they they would would have have been, been, going going down down at at the the usual usual pace. pace. the the reins reins were were broken, broken, but but they they had had been been dragging dragging on on the the ground. ground. the the house house was was roused roused up up directly, directly, and and three three of of them them went went out out along along the the road. road. they they found found him him a a mile mile off.' off.' 'more 'more than than a a mile mile off, off, mr. mr. tiffey,' tiffey,' interposed interposed a a junior. junior. 'was 'was it? it? i i believe believe you are are right,' right,' said said tiffey, tiffey, -- -- 'more 'more than than a a mile mile off off -- -- not not far far from from the the church church -- -- lying lying partly partly on on the the roadside, roadside, and and partly partly on on the the path, path, upon upon his his face. face. whether whether he he fell fell out out in in a a fit, fit, or or got got out, out, feeling feeling ill ill before before the the fit fit came came on on -- -- or or even even whether whether he he was was quite quite dead dead then, then, though though there there is is no no doubt doubt he he was was quite quite insensible insensible -- -- no no one one appears appears to to know. know. if if he he breathed, breathed, certainly certainly he he never never spoke. spoke. medical medical assistance assistance was was got got as as soon soon as as possible, possible, but but it it was was quite quite useless.' useless.' i i cannot cannot describe describe the the state state of of mind mind into into which which i i was was thrown thrown by by this this intelligence. intelligence. the the shock shock of of such such an an event event happening happening so so suddenly, suddenly, and and happening happening to to one one with with whom whom i i had had been been in in any any respect respect at at variance variance -- -- the the appalling appalling vacancy vacancy in in the the room room he he had had occupied occupied so so lately, lately, where where his his chair chair and and table table seemed seemed to to wait wait for for him, him, and and his his handwriting handwriting of of yesterday yesterday was was like like a a ghost ghost -- -- the the indefinable indefinable impossibility impossibility of of separating separating him him from from the the place, place, and and feeling, feeling, when when the the door door opened, opened, as as if if he he might might come come in in -- -- the the lazy lazy hush hush and and rest rest there there was was in in the the office, office, and and the the insatiable insatiable relish relish with with which which our our people people talked talked about about it, it, and and other other people people came came in in and and out out all all day, day, and and gorged gorged themselves themselves with with the the subject subject -- -- this this is is easily easily intelligible intelligible to to anyone. anyone. what what i i cannot cannot describe describe is, is, how, how, in in the the innermost innermost recesses recesses of of my my own own heart, heart, i i had had a a lurking lurking jealousy jealousy even even of of death. death. how how i i felt felt as as if if its its might might would would push push me me from from my my ground ground in in dora's dora's thoughts. thoughts. how how i i was, was, in in a a grudging grudging way way i i have have no no words words for, for, envious envious of of her her grief. grief. how how it it made made me me restless restless to to think think of of her her weeping weeping to to others, others, or or being being consoled consoled by by others. others. how how i i had had a a grasping, grasping, avaricious avaricious wish wish to to shut shut out out everybody everybody from from her her but but myself, myself, and and to to be be all all in in all all to to her, her, at at that that unseasonable unseasonable time time of of all all times. times. in in the the trouble trouble of of this this state state of of mind mind -- -- not not exclusively exclusively my my own, own, i i hope, hope, but but known known to to others others -- -- i i went went down down to to norwood norwood that that night; night; and and finding finding from from one one of of the the servants, servants, when when i i made made my my inquiries inquiries at at the the door, door, that that miss miss mills mills was was there, there, got got my my aunt aunt to to direct direct a a letter letter to to her, her, which which i i wrote. wrote. i i deplored deplored the the untimely untimely death death of of mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, most most sincerely, sincerely, and and shed shed tears tears in in doing doing so. so. i i entreated entreated her her to to tell tell dora, dora, if if dora dora were were in in a a state state to to hear hear it, it, that that he he had had spoken spoken to to me me with with the the utmost utmost kindness kindness and and consideration; consideration; and and had had coupled coupled nothing nothing but but tenderness, tenderness, not not a a single single or or reproachful reproachful word, word, with with her her name. name. i i know know i i did did this this selfishly, selfishly, to to have have my my name name brought brought before before her; her; but but i i tried tried to to believe believe it it was was an an act act of of justice justice to to his his memory. memory. perhaps perhaps i i did did believe believe it. it. my my aunt aunt received received a a few few lines lines next next day day in in reply; reply; addressed, addressed, outside, outside, to to her; her; within, within, to to me. me. dora dora was was overcome overcome by by grief; grief; and and when when her her friend friend had had asked asked her her should should she she send send her her love love to to me, me, had had only only cried, cried, as as she she was was always always crying, crying, 'oh, 'oh, dear dear papa! papa! oh, oh, poor poor papa!' papa!' but but she she had had not not said said no, no, and and that that i i made made the the most most of. of. mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, who who had had been been at at norwood norwood since since the the occurrence, occurrence, came came to to the the office office a a few few days days afterwards. afterwards. he he and and tiffey tiffey were were closeted closeted together together for for some some few few moments, moments, and and then then tiffey tiffey looked looked out out at at the the door door and and beckoned beckoned me me in. in. 'oh!' 'oh!' said said mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. 'mr. 'mr. tiffey tiffey and and myself, myself, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, are are about about to to examine examine the the desks, desks, the the drawers, drawers, and and other other such such repositories repositories of of the the deceased, deceased, with with the the view view of of sealing sealing up up his his private private papers, papers, and and searching searching for for a a will. will. there there is is no no trace trace of of any, any, elsewhere. elsewhere. it it may may be be as as well well for for you to to assist assist us, us, if if you please.' please.' i i had had been been in in agony agony to to obtain obtain some some knowledge knowledge of of the the circumstances circumstances in in which which my my dora dora would would be be placed placed -- -- as, as, in in whose whose guardianship, guardianship, and and so so forth forth -- -- and and this this was was something something towards towards it. it. we we began began the the search search at at once; once; mr. mr. jorkins jorkins unlocking unlocking the the drawers drawers and and desks, desks, and and we we all all taking taking out out the the papers. papers. the the office-papers office-papers we we placed placed on on one one side, side, and and the the private private papers papers (which (which were were not not numerous) numerous) on on the the other. other. we we were were very very grave; grave; and and when when we we came came to to a a stray stray seal, seal, or or pencil-case, pencil-case, or or ring, ring, or or any any little little article article of of that that kind kind which which we we associated associated personally personally with with him, him, we we spoke spoke very very low. low. we we had had sealed sealed up up several several packets; packets; and and were were still still going going on on dustily dustily and and quietly, quietly, when when mr. mr. jorkins jorkins said said to to us, us, applying applying exactly exactly the the same same words words to to his his late late partner partner as as his his late late partner partner had had applied applied to to him: him: 'mr. 'mr. spenlow spenlow was was very very difficult difficult to to move move from from the the beaten beaten track. track. you know know what what he he was! was! i i am am disposed disposed to to think think he he had had made made no no will.' will.' 'oh, 'oh, i i know know he he had!' had!' said said i. i. they they both both stopped stopped and and looked looked at at me. me. 'on 'on the the very very day day when when i i last last saw saw him,' him,' said said i, i, 'he 'he told told me me that that he he had, had, and and that that his his affairs affairs were were long long since since settled.' settled.' mr. mr. jorkins jorkins and and old old tiffey tiffey shook shook their their heads heads with with one one accord. accord. 'that 'that looks looks unpromising,' unpromising,' said said tiffey. tiffey. 'very 'very unpromising,' unpromising,' said said mr. mr. jorkins. jorkins. 'surely 'surely you don't don't doubt doubt -- -- ' ' i i began. began. 'my 'my good good mr. mr. copperfield!' copperfield!' said said tiffey, tiffey, laying laying his his hand hand upon upon my my arm, arm, and and shutting shutting up up both both his his eyes eyes as as he he shook shook his his head: head: 'if 'if you had had been been in in the the commons commons as as long long as as i i have, have, you would would know know that that there there is is no no subject subject on on which which men men are are so so inconsistent, inconsistent, and and so so little little to to be be trusted.' trusted.' 'why, 'why, bless bless my my soul, soul, he he made made that that very very remark!' remark!' i i replied replied persistently. persistently. 'i 'i should should call call that that almost almost final,' final,' observed observed tiffey. tiffey. 'my 'my opinion opinion is is -- -- no no will.' will.' it it appeared appeared a a wonderful wonderful thing thing to to me, me, but but it it turned turned out out that that there there was was no no will. will. he he had had never never so so much much as as thought thought of of making making one, one, so so far far as as his his papers papers afforded afforded any any evidence; evidence; for for there there was was no no kind kind of of hint, hint, sketch, sketch, or or memorandum, memorandum, of of any any testamentary testamentary intention intention whatever. whatever. what what was was scarcely scarcely less less astonishing astonishing to to me, me, was, was, that that his his affairs affairs were were in in a a most most disordered disordered state. state. it it was was extremely extremely difficult, difficult, i i heard, heard, to to make make out out what what he he owed, owed, or or what what he he had had paid, paid, or or of of what what he he died died possessed. possessed. it it was was considered considered likely likely that that for for years years he he could could have have had had no no clear clear opinion opinion on on these these subjects subjects himself. himself. by by little little and and little little it it came came out, out, that, that, in in the the competition competition on on all all points points of of appearance appearance and and gentility gentility then then running running high high in in the the commons, commons, he he had had spent spent more more than than his his professional professional income, income, which which was was not not a a very very large large one, one, and and had had reduced reduced his his private private means, means, if if they they ever ever had had been been great great (which (which was was exceedingly exceedingly doubtful), doubtful), to to a a very very low low ebb ebb indeed. indeed. there there was was a a sale sale of of the the furniture furniture and and lease, lease, at at norwood; norwood; and and tiffey tiffey told told me, me, little little thinking thinking how how interested interested i i was was in in the the story, story, that, that, paying paying all all the the just just debts debts of of the the deceased, deceased, and and deducting deducting his his share share of of outstanding outstanding bad bad and and doubtful doubtful debts debts due due to to the the firm, firm, he he wouldn't wouldn't give give a a thousand thousand pounds pounds for for all all the the assets assets remaining. remaining. this this was was at at the the expiration expiration of of about about six six weeks. weeks. i i had had suffered suffered tortures tortures all all the the time; time; and and thought thought i i really really must must have have laid laid violent violent hands hands upon upon myself, myself, when when miss miss mills mills still still reported reported to to me, me, that that my my broken-hearted broken-hearted little little dora dora would would say say nothing, nothing, when when i i was was mentioned, mentioned, but but 'oh, 'oh, poor poor papa! papa! oh, oh, dear dear papa!' papa!' also, also, that that she she had had no no other other relations relations than than two two aunts, aunts, maiden maiden sisters sisters of of mr. mr. spenlow, spenlow, who who lived lived at at putney, putney, and and who who had had not not held held any any other other than than chance chance communication communication with with their their brother brother for for many many years. years. not not that that they they had had ever ever quarrelled quarrelled (miss (miss mills mills informed informed me); me); but but that that having having been, been, on on the the occasion occasion of of dora's dora's christening, christening, invited invited to to tea, tea, when when they they considered considered themselves themselves privileged privileged to to be be invited invited to to dinner, dinner, they they had had expressed expressed their their opinion opinion in in writing, writing, that that it it was was 'better 'better for for the the happiness happiness of of all all parties' parties' that that they they should should stay stay away. away. since since which which they they had had gone gone their their road, road, and and their their brother brother had had gone gone his. his. these these two two ladies ladies now now emerged emerged from from their their retirement, retirement, and and proposed proposed to to take take dora dora to to live live at at putney. putney. dora, dora, clinging clinging to to them them both, both, and and weeping, weeping, exclaimed, exclaimed, 'o 'o yes, yes, aunts! aunts! please please take take julia julia mills mills and and me me and and jip jip to to putney!' putney!' so so they they went, went, very very soon soon after after the the funeral. funeral. how how i i found found time time to to haunt haunt putney, putney, i i am am sure sure i i don't don't know; know; but but i i contrived, contrived, by by some some means means or or other, other, to to prowl prowl about about the the neighbourhood neighbourhood pretty pretty often. often. miss miss mills, mills, for for the the more more exact exact discharge discharge of of the the duties duties of of friendship, friendship, kept kept a a journal; journal; and and she she used used to to meet meet me me sometimes, sometimes, on on the the common, common, and and read read it, it, or or (if (if she she had had not not time time to to do do that) that) lend lend it it to to me. me. how how i i treasured treasured up up the the entries, entries, of of which which i i subjoin subjoin a a sample sample -- -- ! ! 'monday. 'monday. my my sweet sweet d. d. still still much much depressed. depressed. headache. headache. called called attention attention to to j. j. as as being being beautifully beautifully sleek. sleek. d. d. fondled fondled j. j. associations associations thus thus awakened, awakened, opened opened floodgates floodgates of of sorrow. sorrow. rush rush of of grief grief admitted. admitted. (are (are tears tears the the dewdrops dewdrops of of the the heart? heart? j. j. m.) m.) 'tuesday. 'tuesday. d. d. weak weak and and nervous. nervous. beautiful beautiful in in pallor. pallor. (do (do we we not not remark remark this this in in moon moon likewise? likewise? j. j. m.) m.) d., d., j. j. m. m. and and j. j. took took airing airing in in carriage. carriage. j. j. looking looking out out of of window, window, and and barking barking violently violently at at dustman, dustman, occasioned occasioned smile smile to to overspread overspread features features of of d. d. (of (of such such slight slight links links is is chain chain of of life life composed! composed! j. j. m.) m.) 'wednesday. 'wednesday. d. d. comparatively comparatively cheerful. cheerful. sang sang to to her, her, as as congenial congenial melody, melody, "evening "evening bells". bells". effect effect not not soothing, soothing, but but reverse. reverse. d. d. inexpressibly inexpressibly affected. affected. found found sobbing sobbing afterwards, afterwards, in in own own room. room. quoted quoted verses verses respecting respecting self self and and young young gazelle. gazelle. ineffectually. ineffectually. also also referred referred to to patience patience on on monument. monument. (qy. (qy. why why on on monument? monument? j. j. m.) m.) 'thursday. 'thursday. d. d. certainly certainly improved. improved. better better night. night. slight slight tinge tinge of of damask damask revisiting revisiting cheek. cheek. resolved resolved to to mention mention name name of of d. d. c. c. introduced introduced same, same, cautiously, cautiously, in in course course of of airing. airing. d. d. immediately immediately overcome. overcome. "oh, "oh, dear, dear, dear dear julia! julia! oh, oh, i i have have been been a a naughty naughty and and undutiful undutiful child!" child!" soothed soothed and and caressed. caressed. drew drew ideal ideal picture picture of of d. d. c. c. on on verge verge of of tomb. tomb. d. d. again again overcome. overcome. "oh, "oh, what what shall shall i i do, do, what what shall shall i i do? do? oh, oh, take take me me somewhere!" somewhere!" much much alarmed. alarmed. fainting fainting of of d. d. and and glass glass of of water water from from public-house. public-house. (poetical (poetical affinity. affinity. chequered chequered sign sign on on door-post; door-post; chequered chequered human human life. life. alas! alas! j. j. m.) m.) 'friday. 'friday. day day of of incident. incident. man man appears appears in in kitchen, kitchen, with with blue blue bag, bag, "for "for lady's lady's boots boots left left out out to to heel". heel". cook cook replies, replies, "no "no such such orders." orders." man man argues argues point. point. cook cook withdraws withdraws to to inquire, inquire, leaving leaving man man alone alone with with j. j. on on cook's cook's return, return, man man still still argues argues point, point, but but ultimately ultimately goes. goes. j. j. missing. missing. d. d. distracted. distracted. information information sent sent to to police. police. man man to to be be identified identified by by broad broad nose, nose, and and legs legs like like balustrades balustrades of of bridge. bridge. search search made made in in every every direction. direction. no no j. j. d. d. weeping weeping bitterly, bitterly, and and inconsolable. inconsolable. renewed renewed reference reference to to young young gazelle. gazelle. appropriate, appropriate, but but unavailing. unavailing. towards towards evening, evening, strange strange boy boy calls. calls. brought brought into into parlour. parlour. broad broad nose, nose, but but no no balustrades. balustrades. says says he he wants wants a a pound, pound, and and knows knows a a dog. dog. declines declines to to explain explain further, further, though though much much pressed. pressed. pound pound being being produced produced by by d. d. takes takes cook cook to to little little house, house, where where j. j. alone alone tied tied up up to to leg leg of of table. table. joy joy of of d. d. who who dances dances round round j. j. while while he he eats eats his his supper. supper. emboldened emboldened by by this this happy happy change, change, mention mention d. d. c. c. upstairs. upstairs. d. d. weeps weeps afresh, afresh, cries cries piteously, piteously, "oh, "oh, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't! don't! it it is is so so wicked wicked to to think think of of anything anything but but poor poor papa!" papa!" -- -- embraces embraces j. j. and and sobs sobs herself herself to to sleep. sleep. (must (must not not d. d. c. c. confine confine himself himself to to the the broad broad pinions pinions of of time? time? j. j. m.)' m.)' miss miss mills mills and and her her journal journal were were my my sole sole consolation consolation at at this this period. period. to to see see her, her, who who had had seen seen dora dora but but a a little little while while before before -- -- to to trace trace the the initial initial letter letter of of dora's dora's name name through through her her sympathetic sympathetic pages pages -- -- to to be be made made more more and and more more miserable miserable by by her her -- -- were were my my only only comforts. comforts. i i felt felt as as if if i i had had been been living living in in a a palace palace of of cards, cards, which which had had tumbled tumbled down, down, leaving leaving only only miss miss mills mills and and me me among among the the ruins; ruins; i i felt felt as as if if some some grim grim enchanter enchanter had had drawn drawn a a magic magic circle circle round round the the innocent innocent goddess goddess of of my my heart, heart, which which nothing nothing indeed indeed but but those those same same strong strong pinions, pinions, capable capable of of carrying carrying so so many many people people over over so so much, much, would would enable enable me me to to enter! enter! chapter chapter 39. 39. wickfield wickfield and and heep heep my my aunt, aunt, beginning, beginning, i i imagine, imagine, to to be be made made seriously seriously uncomfortable uncomfortable by by my my prolonged prolonged dejection, dejection, made made a a pretence pretence of of being being anxious anxious that that i i should should go go to to dover, dover, to to see see that that all all was was working working well well at at the the cottage, cottage, which which was was let; let; and and to to conclude conclude an an agreement, agreement, with with the the same same tenant, tenant, for for a a longer longer term term of of occupation. occupation. janet janet was was drafted drafted into into the the service service of of mrs. mrs. strong, strong, where where i i saw saw her her every every day. day. she she had had been been undecided, undecided, on on leaving leaving dover, dover, whether whether or or no no to to give give the the finishing finishing touch touch to to that that renunciation renunciation of of mankind mankind in in which which she she had had been been educated, educated, by by marrying marrying a a pilot; pilot; but but she she decided decided against against that that venture. venture. not not so so much much for for the the sake sake of of principle, principle, i i believe, believe, as as because because she she happened happened not not to to like like him. him. although although it it required required an an effort effort to to leave leave miss miss mills, mills, i i fell fell rather rather willingly willingly into into my my aunt's aunt's pretence, pretence, as as a a means means of of enabling enabling me me to to pass pass a a few few tranquil tranquil hours hours with with agnes. agnes. i i consulted consulted the the good good doctor doctor relative relative to to an an absence absence of of three three days; days; and and the the doctor doctor wishing wishing me me to to take take that that relaxation, relaxation, -- -- he he wished wished me me to to take take more; more; but but my my energy energy could could not not bear bear that, that, -- -- i i made made up up my my mind mind to to go. go. as as to to the the commons, commons, i i had had no no great great occasion occasion to to be be particular particular about about my my duties duties in in that that quarter. quarter. to to say say the the truth, truth, we we were were getting getting in in no no very very good good odour odour among among the the tip-top tip-top proctors, proctors, and and were were rapidly rapidly sliding sliding down down to to but but a a doubtful doubtful position. position. the the business business had had been been indifferent indifferent under under mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, before before mr. mr. spenlow's spenlow's time; time; and and although although it it had had been been quickened quickened by by the the infusion infusion of of new new blood, blood, and and by by the the display display which which mr. mr. spenlow spenlow made, made, still still it it was was not not established established on on a a sufficiently sufficiently strong strong basis basis to to bear, bear, without without being being shaken, shaken, such such a a blow blow as as the the sudden sudden loss loss of of its its active active manager. manager. it it fell fell off off very very much. much. mr. mr. jorkins, jorkins, notwithstanding notwithstanding his his reputation reputation in in the the firm, firm, was was an an easy-going, easy-going, incapable incapable sort sort of of man, man, whose whose reputation reputation out out of of doors doors was was not not calculated calculated to to back back it it up. up. i i was was turned turned over over to to him him now, now, and and when when i i saw saw him him take take his his snuff snuff and and let let the the business business go, go, i i regretted regretted my my aunt's aunt's thousand thousand pounds pounds more more than than ever. ever. but but this this was was not not the the worst worst of of it. it. there there were were a a number number of of hangers-on hangers-on and and outsiders outsiders about about the the commons, commons, who, who, without without being being proctors proctors themselves, themselves, dabbled dabbled in in common-form common-form business, business, and and got got it it done done by by real real proctors, proctors, who who lent lent their their names names in in consideration consideration of of a a share share in in the the spoil; spoil; -- -- and and there there were were a a good good many many of of these these too. too. as as our our house house now now wanted wanted business business on on any any terms, terms, we we joined joined this this noble noble band; band; and and threw threw out out lures lures to to the the hangers-on hangers-on and and outsiders, outsiders, to to bring bring their their business business to to us. us. marriage marriage licences licences and and small small probates probates were were what what we we all all looked looked for, for, and and what what paid paid us us best; best; and and the the competition competition for for these these ran ran very very high high indeed. indeed. kidnappers kidnappers and and inveiglers inveiglers were were planted planted in in all all the the avenues avenues of of entrance entrance to to the the commons, commons, with with instructions instructions to to do do their their utmost utmost to to cut cut off off all all persons persons in in mourning, mourning, and and all all gentlemen gentlemen with with anything anything bashful bashful in in their their appearance, appearance, and and entice entice them them to to the the offices offices in in which which their their respective respective employers employers were were interested; interested; which which instructions instructions were were so so well well observed, observed, that that i i myself, myself, before before i i was was known known by by sight, sight, was was twice twice hustled hustled into into the the premises premises of of our our principal principal opponent. opponent. the the conflicting conflicting interests interests of of these these touting touting gentlemen gentlemen being being of of a a nature nature to to irritate irritate their their feelings, feelings, personal personal collisions collisions took took place; place; and and the the commons commons was was even even scandalized scandalized by by our our principal principal inveigler inveigler (who (who had had formerly formerly been been in in the the wine wine trade, trade, and and afterwards afterwards in in the the sworn sworn brokery brokery line) line) walking walking about about for for some some days days with with a a black black eye. eye. any any one one of of these these scouts scouts used used to to think think nothing nothing of of politely politely assisting assisting an an old old lady lady in in black black out out of of a a vehicle, vehicle, killing killing any any proctor proctor whom whom she she inquired inquired for, for, representing representing his his employer employer as as the the lawful lawful successor successor and and representative representative of of that that proctor, proctor, and and bearing bearing the the old old lady lady off off (sometimes (sometimes greatly greatly affected) affected) to to his his employer's employer's office. office. many many captives captives were were brought brought to to me me in in this this way. way. as as to to marriage marriage licences, licences, the the competition competition rose rose to to such such a a pitch, pitch, that that a a shy shy gentleman gentleman in in want want of of one, one, had had nothing nothing to to do do but but submit submit himself himself to to the the first first inveigler, inveigler, or or be be fought fought for, for, and and become become the the prey prey of of the the strongest. strongest. one one of of our our clerks, clerks, who who was was an an outsider, outsider, used, used, in in the the height height of of this this contest, contest, to to sit sit with with his his hat hat on, on, that that he he might might be be ready ready to to rush rush out out and and swear swear before before a a surrogate surrogate any any victim victim who who was was brought brought in. in. the the system system of of inveigling inveigling continues, continues, i i believe, believe, to to this this day. day. the the last last time time i i was was in in the the commons, commons, a a civil civil able-bodied able-bodied person person in in a a white white apron apron pounced pounced out out upon upon me me from from a a doorway, doorway, and and whispering whispering the the word word 'marriage-licence' 'marriage-licence' in in my my ear, ear, was was with with great great difficulty difficulty prevented prevented from from taking taking me me up up in in his his arms arms and and lifting lifting me me into into a a proctor's. proctor's. from from this this digression, digression, let let me me proceed proceed to to dover. dover. i i found found everything everything in in a a satisfactory satisfactory state state at at the the cottage; cottage; and and was was enabled enabled to to gratify gratify my my aunt aunt exceedingly exceedingly by by reporting reporting that that the the tenant tenant inherited inherited her her feud, feud, and and waged waged incessant incessant war war against against donkeys. donkeys. having having settled settled the the little little business business i i had had to to transact transact there, there, and and slept slept there there one one night, night, i i walked walked on on to to canterbury canterbury early early in in the the morning. morning. it it was was now now winter winter again; again; and and the the fresh, fresh, cold cold windy windy day, day, and and the the sweeping sweeping downland, downland, brightened brightened up up my my hopes hopes a a little. little. coming coming into into canterbury, canterbury, i i loitered loitered through through the the old old streets streets with with a a sober sober pleasure pleasure that that calmed calmed my my spirits, spirits, and and eased eased my my heart. heart. there there were were the the old old signs, signs, the the old old names names over over the the shops, shops, the the old old people people serving serving in in them. them. it it appeared appeared so so long, long, since since i i had had been been a a schoolboy schoolboy there, there, that that i i wondered wondered the the place place was was so so little little changed, changed, until until i i reflected reflected how how little little i i was was changed changed myself. myself. strange strange to to say, say, that that quiet quiet influence influence which which was was inseparable inseparable in in my my mind mind from from agnes, agnes, seemed seemed to to pervade pervade even even the the city city where where she she dwelt. dwelt. the the venerable venerable cathedral cathedral towers, towers, and and the the old old jackdaws jackdaws and and rooks rooks whose whose airy airy voices voices made made them them more more retired retired than than perfect perfect silence silence would would have have done; done; the the battered battered gateways, gateways, one one stuck stuck full full with with statues, statues, long long thrown thrown down, down, and and crumbled crumbled away, away, like like the the reverential reverential pilgrims pilgrims who who had had gazed gazed upon upon them; them; the the still still nooks, nooks, where where the the ivied ivied growth growth of of centuries centuries crept crept over over gabled gabled ends ends and and ruined ruined walls; walls; the the ancient ancient houses, houses, the the pastoral pastoral landscape landscape of of field, field, orchard, orchard, and and garden; garden; everywhere everywhere -- -- on on everything everything -- -- i i felt felt the the same same serener serener air, air, the the same same calm, calm, thoughtful, thoughtful, softening softening spirit. spirit. arrived arrived at at mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's house, house, i i found, found, in in the the little little lower lower room room on on the the ground ground floor, floor, where where uriah uriah heep heep had had been been of of old old accustomed accustomed to to sit, sit, mr. mr. micawber micawber plying plying his his pen pen with with great great assiduity. assiduity. he he was was dressed dressed in in a a legal-looking legal-looking suit suit of of black, black, and and loomed, loomed, burly burly and and large, large, in in that that small small office. office. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was extremely extremely glad glad to to see see me, me, but but a a little little confused confused too. too. he he would would have have conducted conducted me me immediately immediately into into the the presence presence of of uriah, uriah, but but i i declined. declined. 'i 'i know know the the house house of of old, old, you recollect,' recollect,' said said i, i, 'and 'and will will find find my my way way upstairs. upstairs. how how do do you like like the the law, law, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replied. replied. 'to 'to a a man man possessed possessed of of the the higher higher imaginative imaginative powers, powers, the the objection objection to to legal legal studies studies is is the the amount amount of of detail detail which which they they involve. involve. even even in in our our professional professional correspondence,' correspondence,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, glancing glancing at at some some letters letters he he was was writing, writing, 'the 'the mind mind is is not not at at liberty liberty to to soar soar to to any any exalted exalted form form of of expression. expression. still, still, it it is is a a great great pursuit. pursuit. a a great great pursuit!' pursuit!' he he then then told told me me that that he he had had become become the the tenant tenant of of uriah uriah heep's heep's old old house; house; and and that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber would would be be delighted delighted to to receive receive me, me, once once more, more, under under her her own own roof. roof. 'it 'it is is humble,' humble,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, ' ' -- -- to to quote quote a a favourite favourite expression expression of of my my friend friend heep; heep; but but it it may may prove prove the the stepping-stone stepping-stone to to more more ambitious ambitious domiciliary domiciliary accommodation.' accommodation.' i i asked asked him him whether whether he he had had reason, reason, so so far, far, to to be be satisfied satisfied with with his his friend friend heep's heep's treatment treatment of of him? him? he he got got up up to to ascertain ascertain if if the the door door were were close close shut, shut, before before he he replied, replied, in in a a lower lower voice: voice: 'my 'my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, a a man man who who labours labours under under the the pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary embarrassments, embarrassments, is, is, with with the the generality generality of of people, people, at at a a disadvantage. disadvantage. that that disadvantage disadvantage is is not not diminished, diminished, when when that that pressure pressure necessitates necessitates the the drawing drawing of of stipendiary stipendiary emoluments, emoluments, before before those those emoluments emoluments are are strictly strictly due due and and payable. payable. all all i i can can say say is, is, that that my my friend friend heep heep has has responded responded to to appeals appeals to to which which i i need need not not more more particularly particularly refer, refer, in in a a manner manner calculated calculated to to redound redound equally equally to to the the honour honour of of his his head, head, and and of of his his heart.' heart.' 'i 'i should should not not have have supposed supposed him him to to be be very very free free with with his his money money either,' either,' i i observed. observed. 'pardon 'pardon me!' me!' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with an an air air of of constraint, constraint, 'i 'i speak speak of of my my friend friend heep heep as as i i have have experience.' experience.' 'i 'i am am glad glad your your experience experience is is so so favourable,' favourable,' i i returned. returned. 'you are are very very obliging, obliging, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber; micawber; and and hummed hummed a a tune. tune. 'do 'do you see see much much of of mr. mr. wickfield?' wickfield?' i i asked, asked, to to change change the the subject. subject. 'not 'not much,' much,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, slightingly. slightingly. 'mr. 'mr. wickfield wickfield is, is, i i dare dare say, say, a a man man of of very very excellent excellent intentions; intentions; but but he he is is -- -- in in short, short, he he is is obsolete.' obsolete.' 'i 'i am am afraid afraid his his partner partner seeks seeks to to make make him him so,' so,' said said i. i. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield!' copperfield!' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, after after some some uneasy uneasy evolutions evolutions on on his his stool, stool, 'allow 'allow me me to to offer offer a a remark! remark! i i am am here, here, in in a a capacity capacity of of confidence. confidence. i i am am here, here, in in a a position position of of trust. trust. the the discussion discussion of of some some topics, topics, even even with with mrs. mrs. micawber micawber herself herself (so (so long long the the partner partner of of my my various various vicissitudes, vicissitudes, and and a a woman woman of of a a remarkable remarkable lucidity lucidity of of intellect), intellect), is, is, i i am am led led to to consider, consider, incompatible incompatible with with the the functions functions now now devolving devolving on on me. me. i i would would therefore therefore take take the the liberty liberty of of suggesting suggesting that that in in our our friendly friendly intercourse intercourse -- -- which which i i trust trust will will never never be be disturbed! disturbed! -- -- we we draw draw a a line. line. on on one one side side of of this this line,' line,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, representing representing it it on on the the desk desk with with the the office office ruler, ruler, 'is 'is the the whole whole range range of of the the human human intellect, intellect, with with a a trifling trifling exception; exception; on on the the other, other, is is that that exception; exception; that that is is to to say, say, the the affairs affairs of of messrs messrs wickfield wickfield and and heep, heep, with with all all belonging belonging and and appertaining appertaining thereunto. thereunto. i i trust trust i i give give no no offence offence to to the the companion companion of of my my youth, youth, in in submitting submitting this this proposition proposition to to his his cooler cooler judgement?' judgement?' though though i i saw saw an an uneasy uneasy change change in in mr. mr. micawber, micawber, which which sat sat tightly tightly on on him, him, as as if if his his new new duties duties were were a a misfit, misfit, i i felt felt i i had had no no right right to to be be offended. offended. my my telling telling him him so, so, appeared appeared to to relieve relieve him; him; and and he he shook shook hands hands with with me. me. 'i 'i am am charmed, charmed, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'let 'let me me assure assure you, with with miss miss wickfield. wickfield. she she is is a a very very superior superior young young lady, lady, of of very very remarkable remarkable attractions, attractions, graces, graces, and and virtues. virtues. upon upon my my honour,' honour,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, indefinitely indefinitely kissing kissing his his hand hand and and bowing bowing with with his his genteelest genteelest air, air, 'i 'i do do homage homage to to miss miss wickfield! wickfield! hem!' hem!' 'i 'i am am glad glad of of that, that, at at least,' least,' said said i. i. 'if 'if you had had not not assured assured us, us, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, on on the the occasion occasion of of that that agreeable agreeable afternoon afternoon we we had had the the happiness happiness of of passing passing with with you, that that d. d. was was your your favourite favourite letter,' letter,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i should should unquestionably unquestionably have have supposed supposed that that a. a. had had been been so.' so.' we we have have all all some some experience experience of of a a feeling, feeling, that that comes comes over over us us occasionally, occasionally, of of what what we we are are saying saying and and doing doing having having been been said said and and done done before, before, in in a a remote remote time time -- -- of of our our having having been been surrounded, surrounded, dim dim ages ages ago, ago, by by the the same same faces, faces, objects, objects, and and circumstances circumstances -- -- of of our our knowing knowing perfectly perfectly what what will will be be said said next, next, as as if if we we suddenly suddenly remembered remembered it! it! i i never never had had this this mysterious mysterious impression impression more more strongly strongly in in my my life, life, than than before before he he uttered uttered those those words. words. i i took took my my leave leave of of mr. mr. micawber, micawber, for for the the time, time, charging charging him him with with my my best best remembrances remembrances to to all all at at home. home. as as i i left left him, him, resuming resuming his his stool stool and and his his pen, pen, and and rolling rolling his his head head in in his his stock, stock, to to get get it it into into easier easier writing writing order, order, i i clearly clearly perceived perceived that that there there was was something something interposed interposed between between him him and and me, me, since since he he had had come come into into his his new new functions, functions, which which prevented prevented our our getting getting at at each each other other as as we we used used to to do, do, and and quite quite altered altered the the character character of of our our intercourse. intercourse. there there was was no no one one in in the the quaint quaint old old drawing-room, drawing-room, though though it it presented presented tokens tokens of of mrs. mrs. heep's heep's whereabouts. whereabouts. i i looked looked into into the the room room still still belonging belonging to to agnes, agnes, and and saw saw her her sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, at at a a pretty pretty old-fashioned old-fashioned desk desk she she had, had, writing. writing. my my darkening darkening the the light light made made her her look look up. up. what what a a pleasure pleasure to to be be the the cause cause of of that that bright bright change change in in her her attentive attentive face, face, and and the the object object of of that that sweet sweet regard regard and and welcome! welcome! 'ah, 'ah, agnes!' agnes!' said said i, i, when when we we were were sitting sitting together, together, side side by by side; side; 'i 'i have have missed missed you so so much, much, lately!' lately!' 'indeed?' 'indeed?' she she replied. replied. 'again! 'again! and and so so soon?' soon?' i i shook shook my my head. head. 'i 'i don't don't know know how how it it is, is, agnes; agnes; i i seem seem to to want want some some faculty faculty of of mind mind that that i i ought ought to to have. have. you were were so so much much in in the the habit habit of of thinking thinking for for me, me, in in the the happy happy old old days days here, here, and and i i came came so so naturally naturally to to you for for counsel counsel and and support, support, that that i i really really think think i i have have missed missed acquiring acquiring it.' it.' 'and 'and what what is is it?' it?' said said agnes, agnes, cheerfully. cheerfully. 'i 'i don't don't know know what what to to call call it,' it,' i i replied. replied. 'i 'i think think i i am am earnest earnest and and persevering?' persevering?' 'i 'i am am sure sure of of it,' it,' said said agnes. agnes. 'and 'and patient, patient, agnes?' agnes?' i i inquired, inquired, with with a a little little hesitation. hesitation. 'yes,' 'yes,' returned returned agnes, agnes, laughing. laughing. 'pretty 'pretty well.' well.' 'and 'and yet,' yet,' said said i, i, 'i 'i get get so so miserable miserable and and worried, worried, and and am am so so unsteady unsteady and and irresolute irresolute in in my my power power of of assuring assuring myself, myself, that that i i know know i i must must want want -- -- shall shall i i call call it it -- -- reliance, reliance, of of some some kind?' kind?' 'call 'call it it so, so, if if you will,' will,' said said agnes. agnes. 'well!' 'well!' i i returned. returned. 'see 'see here! here! you come come to to london, london, i i rely rely on on you, and and i i have have an an object object and and a a course course at at once. once. i i am am driven driven out out of of it, it, i i come come here, here, and and in in a a moment moment i i feel feel an an altered altered person. person. the the circumstances circumstances that that distressed distressed me me are are not not changed, changed, since since i i came came into into this this room; room; but but an an influence influence comes comes over over me me in in that that short short interval interval that that alters alters me, me, oh, oh, how how much much for for the the better! better! what what is is it? it? what what is is your your secret, secret, agnes?' agnes?' her her head head was was bent bent down, down, looking looking at at the the fire. fire. 'it's 'it's the the old old story,' story,' said said i. i. 'don't 'don't laugh, laugh, when when i i say say it it was was always always the the same same in in little little things things as as it it is is in in greater greater ones. ones. my my old old troubles troubles were were nonsense, nonsense, and and now now they they are are serious; serious; but but whenever whenever i i have have gone gone away away from from my my adopted adopted sister sister -- -- ' ' agnes agnes looked looked up up -- -- with with such such a a heavenly heavenly face! face! -- -- and and gave gave me me her her hand, hand, which which i i kissed. kissed. 'whenever 'whenever i i have have not not had had you, agnes, agnes, to to advise advise and and approve approve in in the the beginning, beginning, i i have have seemed seemed to to go go wild, wild, and and to to get get into into all all sorts sorts of of difficulty. difficulty. when when i i have have come come to to you, at at last last (as (as i i have have always always done), done), i i have have come come to to peace peace and and happiness. happiness. i i come come home, home, now, now, like like a a tired tired traveller, traveller, and and find find such such a a blessed blessed sense sense of of rest!' rest!' i i felt felt so so deeply deeply what what i i said, said, it it affected affected me me so so sincerely, sincerely, that that my my voice voice failed, failed, and and i i covered covered my my face face with with my my hand, hand, and and broke broke into into tears. tears. i i write write the the truth. truth. whatever whatever contradictions contradictions and and inconsistencies inconsistencies there there were were within within me, me, as as there there are are within within so so many many of of us; us; whatever whatever might might have have been been so so different, different, and and so so much much better; better; whatever whatever i i had had done, done, in in which which i i had had perversely perversely wandered wandered away away from from the the voice voice of of my my own own heart; heart; i i knew knew nothing nothing of. of. i i only only knew knew that that i i was was fervently fervently in in earnest, earnest, when when i i felt felt the the rest rest and and peace peace of of having having agnes agnes near near me. me. in in her her placid placid sisterly sisterly manner; manner; with with her her beaming beaming eyes; eyes; with with her her tender tender voice; voice; and and with with that that sweet sweet composure, composure, which which had had long long ago ago made made the the house house that that held held her her quite quite a a sacred sacred place place to to me; me; she she soon soon won won me me from from this this weakness, weakness, and and led led me me on on to to tell tell all all that that had had happened happened since since our our last last meeting. meeting. 'and 'and there there is is not not another another word word to to tell, tell, agnes,' agnes,' said said i, i, when when i i had had made made an an end end of of my my confidence. confidence. 'now, 'now, my my reliance reliance is is on on you.' 'but 'but it it must must not not be be on on me, me, trotwood,' trotwood,' returned returned agnes, agnes, with with a a pleasant pleasant smile. smile. 'it 'it must must be be on on someone someone else.' else.' 'on 'on dora?' dora?' said said i. i. 'assuredly.' 'assuredly.' 'why, 'why, i i have have not not mentioned, mentioned, agnes,' agnes,' said said i, i, a a little little embarrassed, embarrassed, 'that 'that dora dora is is rather rather difficult difficult to to -- -- i i would would not, not, for for the the world, world, say, say, to to rely rely upon, upon, because because she she is is the the soul soul of of purity purity and and truth truth -- -- but but rather rather difficult difficult to to -- -- i i hardly hardly know know how how to to express express it, it, really, really, agnes. agnes. she she is is a a timid timid little little thing, thing, and and easily easily disturbed disturbed and and frightened. frightened. some some time time ago, ago, before before her her father's father's death, death, when when i i thought thought it it right right to to mention mention to to her her -- -- but but i'll i'll tell tell you, if if you will will bear bear with with me, me, how how it it was.' was.' accordingly, accordingly, i i told told agnes agnes about about my my declaration declaration of of poverty, poverty, about about the the cookery-book, cookery-book, the the housekeeping housekeeping accounts, accounts, and and all all the the rest rest of of it. it. 'oh, 'oh, trotwood!' trotwood!' she she remonstrated, remonstrated, with with a a smile. smile. 'just 'just your your old old headlong headlong way! way! you might might have have been been in in earnest earnest in in striving striving to to get get on on in in the the world, world, without without being being so so very very sudden sudden with with a a timid, timid, loving, loving, inexperienced inexperienced girl. girl. poor poor dora!' dora!' i i never never heard heard such such sweet sweet forbearing forbearing kindness kindness expressed expressed in in a a voice, voice, as as she she expressed expressed in in making making this this reply. reply. it it was was as as if if i i had had seen seen her her admiringly admiringly and and tenderly tenderly embracing embracing dora, dora, and and tacitly tacitly reproving reproving me, me, by by her her considerate considerate protection, protection, for for my my hot hot haste haste in in fluttering fluttering that that little little heart. heart. it it was was as as if if i i had had seen seen dora, dora, in in all all her her fascinating fascinating artlessness, artlessness, caressing caressing agnes, agnes, and and thanking thanking her, her, and and coaxingly coaxingly appealing appealing against against me, me, and and loving loving me me with with all all her her childish childish innocence. innocence. i i felt felt so so grateful grateful to to agnes, agnes, and and admired admired her her so! so! i i saw saw those those two two together, together, in in a a bright bright perspective, perspective, such such well-associated well-associated friends, friends, each each adorning adorning the the other other so so much! much! 'what 'what ought ought i i to to do do then, then, agnes?' agnes?' i i inquired, inquired, after after looking looking at at the the fire fire a a little little while. while. 'what 'what would would it it be be right right to to do?' do?' 'i 'i think,' think,' said said agnes, agnes, 'that 'that the the honourable honourable course course to to take, take, would would be be to to write write to to those those two two ladies. ladies. don't don't you think think that that any any secret secret course course is is an an unworthy unworthy one?' one?' 'yes. 'yes. if if you think think so,' so,' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am poorly poorly qualified qualified to to judge judge of of such such matters,' matters,' replied replied agnes, agnes, with with a a modest modest hesitation, hesitation, 'but 'but i i certainly certainly feel feel -- -- in in short, short, i i feel feel that that your your being being secret secret and and clandestine, clandestine, is is not not being being like like yourself.' yourself.' 'like 'like myself, myself, in in the the too too high high opinion opinion you have have of of me, me, agnes, agnes, i i am am afraid,' afraid,' said said i. i. 'like 'like yourself, yourself, in in the the candour candour of of your your nature,' nature,' she she returned; returned; 'and 'and therefore therefore i i would would write write to to those those two two ladies. ladies. i i would would relate, relate, as as plainly plainly and and as as openly openly as as possible, possible, all all that that has has taken taken place; place; and and i i would would ask ask their their permission permission to to visit visit sometimes, sometimes, at at their their house. house. considering considering that that you are are young, young, and and striving striving for for a a place place in in life, life, i i think think it it would would be be well well to to say say that that you would would readily readily abide abide by by any any conditions conditions they they might might impose impose upon upon you. i i would would entreat entreat them them not not to to dismiss dismiss your your request, request, without without a a reference reference to to dora; dora; and and to to discuss discuss it it with with her her when when they they should should think think the the time time suitable. suitable. i i would would not not be be too too vehement,' vehement,' said said agnes, agnes, gently, gently, 'or 'or propose propose too too much. much. i i would would trust trust to to my my fidelity fidelity and and perseverance perseverance -- -- and and to to dora.' dora.' 'but 'but if if they they were were to to frighten frighten dora dora again, again, agnes, agnes, by by speaking speaking to to her,' her,' said said i. i. 'and 'and if if dora dora were were to to cry, cry, and and say say nothing nothing about about me!' me!' 'is 'is that that likely?' likely?' inquired inquired agnes, agnes, with with the the same same sweet sweet consideration consideration in in her her face. face. 'god 'god bless bless her, her, she she is is as as easily easily scared scared as as a a bird,' bird,' said said i. i. 'it 'it might might be! be! or or if if the the two two miss miss spenlows spenlows (elderly (elderly ladies ladies of of that that sort sort are are odd odd characters characters sometimes) sometimes) should should not not be be likely likely persons persons to to address address in in that that way!' way!' 'i 'i don't don't think, think, trotwood,' trotwood,' returned returned agnes, agnes, raising raising her her soft soft eyes eyes to to mine, mine, 'i 'i would would consider consider that. that. perhaps perhaps it it would would be be better better only only to to consider consider whether whether it it is is right right to to do do this; this; and, and, if if it it is, is, to to do do it.' it.' i i had had no no longer longer any any doubt doubt on on the the subject. subject. with with a a lightened lightened heart, heart, though though with with a a profound profound sense sense of of the the weighty weighty importance importance of of my my task, task, i i devoted devoted the the whole whole afternoon afternoon to to the the composition composition of of the the draft draft of of this this letter; letter; for for which which great great purpose, purpose, agnes agnes relinquished relinquished her her desk desk to to me. me. but but first first i i went went downstairs downstairs to to see see mr. mr. wickfield wickfield and and uriah uriah heep. heep. i i found found uriah uriah in in possession possession of of a a new, new, plaster-smelling plaster-smelling office, office, built built out out in in the the garden; garden; looking looking extraordinarily extraordinarily mean, mean, in in the the midst midst of of a a quantity quantity of of books books and and papers. papers. he he received received me me in in his his usual usual fawning fawning way, way, and and pretended pretended not not to to have have heard heard of of my my arrival arrival from from mr. mr. micawber; micawber; a a pretence pretence i i took took the the liberty liberty of of disbelieving. disbelieving. he he accompanied accompanied me me into into mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's room, room, which which was was the the shadow shadow of of its its former former self self -- -- having having been been divested divested of of a a variety variety of of conveniences, conveniences, for for the the accommodation accommodation of of the the new new partner partner -- -- and and stood stood before before the the fire, fire, warming warming his his back, back, and and shaving shaving his his chin chin with with his his bony bony hand, hand, while while mr. mr. wickfield wickfield and and i i exchanged exchanged greetings. greetings. 'you stay stay with with us, us, trotwood, trotwood, while while you remain remain in in canterbury?' canterbury?' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, not not without without a a glance glance at at uriah uriah for for his his approval. approval. 'is 'is there there room room for for me?' me?' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am sure, sure, master master copperfield copperfield -- -- i i should should say say mister, mister, but but the the other other comes comes so so natural,' natural,' said said uriah, uriah, -- -- 'i 'i would would turn turn out out of of your your old old room room with with pleasure, pleasure, if if it it would would be be agreeable.' agreeable.' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'why 'why should should you be be inconvenienced? inconvenienced? there's there's another another room. room. there's there's another another room.' room.' 'oh, 'oh, but but you know,' know,' returned returned uriah, uriah, with with a a grin, grin, 'i 'i should should really really be be delighted!' delighted!' to to cut cut the the matter matter short, short, i i said said i i would would have have the the other other room room or or none none at at all; all; so so it it was was settled settled that that i i should should have have the the other other room; room; and, and, taking taking my my leave leave of of the the firm firm until until dinner, dinner, i i went went upstairs upstairs again. again. i i had had hoped hoped to to have have no no other other companion companion than than agnes. agnes. but but mrs. mrs. heep heep had had asked asked permission permission to to bring bring herself herself and and her her knitting knitting near near the the fire, fire, in in that that room; room; on on pretence pretence of of its its having having an an aspect aspect more more favourable favourable for for her her rheumatics, rheumatics, as as the the wind wind then then was, was, than than the the drawing-room drawing-room or or dining-parlour. dining-parlour. though though i i could could almost almost have have consigned consigned her her to to the the mercies mercies of of the the wind wind on on the the topmost topmost pinnacle pinnacle of of the the cathedral, cathedral, without without remorse, remorse, i i made made a a virtue virtue of of necessity, necessity, and and gave gave her her a a friendly friendly salutation. salutation. 'i'm 'i'm umbly umbly thankful thankful to to you, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. heep, heep, in in acknowledgement acknowledgement of of my my inquiries inquiries concerning concerning her her health, health, 'but 'but i'm i'm only only pretty pretty well. well. i i haven't haven't much much to to boast boast of. of. if if i i could could see see my my uriah uriah well well settled settled in in life, life, i i couldn't couldn't expect expect much much more more i i think. think. how how do do you think think my my ury ury looking, looking, sir?' sir?' i i thought thought him him looking looking as as villainous villainous as as ever, ever, and and i i replied replied that that i i saw saw no no change change in in him. him. 'oh, 'oh, don't don't you think think he's he's changed?' changed?' said said mrs. mrs. heep. heep. 'there 'there i i must must umbly umbly beg beg leave leave to to differ differ from from you. don't don't you see see a a thinness thinness in in him?' him?' 'not 'not more more than than usual,' usual,' i i replied. replied. 'don't 'don't you though!' though!' said said mrs. mrs. heep. heep. 'but 'but you don't don't take take notice notice of of him him with with a a mother's mother's eye!' eye!' his his mother's mother's eye eye was was an an evil evil eye eye to to the the rest rest of of the the world, world, i i thought thought as as it it met met mine, mine, howsoever howsoever affectionate affectionate to to him; him; and and i i believe believe she she and and her her son son were were devoted devoted to to one one another. another. it it passed passed me, me, and and went went on on to to agnes. agnes. 'don't 'don't you see see a a wasting wasting and and a a wearing wearing in in him, him, miss miss wickfield?' wickfield?' inquired inquired mrs. mrs. heep. heep. 'no,' 'no,' said said agnes, agnes, quietly quietly pursuing pursuing the the work work on on which which she she was was engaged. engaged. 'you are are too too solicitous solicitous about about him. him. he he is is very very well.' well.' mrs. mrs. heep, heep, with with a a prodigious prodigious sniff, sniff, resumed resumed her her knitting. knitting. she she never never left left off, off, or or left left us us for for a a moment. moment. i i had had arrived arrived early early in in the the day, day, and and we we had had still still three three or or four four hours hours before before dinner; dinner; but but she she sat sat there, there, plying plying her her knitting-needles knitting-needles as as monotonously monotonously as as an an hour-glass hour-glass might might have have poured poured out out its its sands. sands. she she sat sat on on one one side side of of the the fire; fire; i i sat sat at at the the desk desk in in front front of of it; it; a a little little beyond beyond me, me, on on the the other other side, side, sat sat agnes. agnes. whensoever, whensoever, slowly slowly pondering pondering over over my my letter, letter, i i lifted lifted up up my my eyes, eyes, and and meeting meeting the the thoughtful thoughtful face face of of agnes, agnes, saw saw it it clear, clear, and and beam beam encouragement encouragement upon upon me, me, with with its its own own angelic angelic expression, expression, i i was was conscious conscious presently presently of of the the evil evil eye eye passing passing me, me, and and going going on on to to her, her, and and coming coming back back to to me me again, again, and and dropping dropping furtively furtively upon upon the the knitting. knitting. what what the the knitting knitting was, was, i i don't don't know, know, not not being being learned learned in in that that art; art; but but it it looked looked like like a a net; net; and and as as she she worked worked away away with with those those chinese chinese chopsticks chopsticks of of knitting-needles, knitting-needles, she she showed showed in in the the firelight firelight like like an an ill-looking ill-looking enchantress, enchantress, baulked baulked as as yet yet by by the the radiant radiant goodness goodness opposite, opposite, but but getting getting ready ready for for a a cast cast of of her her net net by by and and by. by. at at dinner dinner she she maintained maintained her her watch, watch, with with the the same same unwinking unwinking eyes. eyes. after after dinner, dinner, her her son son took took his his turn; turn; and and when when mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, himself, himself, and and i i were were left left alone alone together, together, leered leered at at me, me, and and writhed writhed until until i i could could hardly hardly bear bear it. it. in in the the drawing-room, drawing-room, there there was was the the mother mother knitting knitting and and watching watching again. again. all all the the time time that that agnes agnes sang sang and and played, played, the the mother mother sat sat at at the the piano. piano. once once she she asked asked for for a a particular particular ballad, ballad, which which she she said said her her ury ury (who (who was was yawning yawning in in a a great great chair) chair) doted doted on; on; and and at at intervals intervals she she looked looked round round at at him, him, and and reported reported to to agnes agnes that that he he was was in in raptures raptures with with the the music. music. but but she she hardly hardly ever ever spoke spoke -- -- i i question question if if she she ever ever did did -- -- without without making making some some mention mention of of him. him. it it was was evident evident to to me me that that this this was was the the duty duty assigned assigned to to her. her. this this lasted lasted until until bedtime. bedtime. to to have have seen seen the the mother mother and and son, son, like like two two great great bats bats hanging hanging over over the the whole whole house, house, and and darkening darkening it it with with their their ugly ugly forms, forms, made made me me so so uncomfortable, uncomfortable, that that i i would would rather rather have have remained remained downstairs, downstairs, knitting knitting and and all, all, than than gone gone to to bed. bed. i i hardly hardly got got any any sleep. sleep. next next day day the the knitting knitting and and watching watching began began again, again, and and lasted lasted all all day. day. i i had had not not an an opportunity opportunity of of speaking speaking to to agnes, agnes, for for ten ten minutes. minutes. i i could could barely barely show show her her my my letter. letter. i i proposed proposed to to her her to to walk walk out out with with me; me; but but mrs. mrs. heep heep repeatedly repeatedly complaining complaining that that she she was was worse, worse, agnes agnes charitably charitably remained remained within, within, to to bear bear her her company. company. towards towards the the twilight twilight i i went went out out by by myself, myself, musing musing on on what what i i ought ought to to do, do, and and whether whether i i was was justified justified in in withholding withholding from from agnes, agnes, any any longer, longer, what what uriah uriah heep heep had had told told me me in in london; london; for for that that began began to to trouble trouble me me again, again, very very much. much. i i had had not not walked walked out out far far enough enough to to be be quite quite clear clear of of the the town, town, upon upon the the ramsgate ramsgate road, road, where where there there was was a a good good path, path, when when i i was was hailed, hailed, through through the the dust, dust, by by somebody somebody behind behind me. me. the the shambling shambling figure, figure, and and the the scanty scanty great-coat, great-coat, were were not not to to be be mistaken. mistaken. i i stopped, stopped, and and uriah uriah heep heep came came up. up. 'well?' 'well?' said said i. i. 'how 'how fast fast you walk!' walk!' said said he. he. 'my 'my legs legs are are pretty pretty long, long, but but you've you've given given 'em 'em quite quite a a job.' job.' 'where 'where are are you going?' going?' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am going going with with you, master master copperfield, copperfield, if if you'll you'll allow allow me me the the pleasure pleasure of of a a walk walk with with an an old old acquaintance.' acquaintance.' saying saying this, this, with with a a jerk jerk of of his his body, body, which which might might have have been been either either propitiatory propitiatory or or derisive, derisive, he he fell fell into into step step beside beside me. me. 'uriah!' 'uriah!' said said i, i, as as civilly civilly as as i i could, could, after after a a silence. silence. 'master 'master copperfield!' copperfield!' said said uriah. uriah. 'to 'to tell tell you the the truth truth (at (at which which you will will not not be be offended), offended), i i came came out out to to walk walk alone, alone, because because i i have have had had so so much much company.' company.' he he looked looked at at me me sideways, sideways, and and said said with with his his hardest hardest grin, grin, 'you mean mean mother.' mother.' 'why 'why yes, yes, i i do,' do,' said said i. i. 'ah! 'ah! but but you know know we're we're so so very very umble,' umble,' he he returned. returned. 'and 'and having having such such a a knowledge knowledge of of our our own own umbleness, umbleness, we we must must really really take take care care that that we're we're not not pushed pushed to to the the wall wall by by them them as as isn't isn't umble. umble. all all stratagems stratagems are are fair fair in in love, love, sir.' sir.' raising raising his his great great hands hands until until they they touched touched his his chin, chin, he he rubbed rubbed them them softly, softly, and and softly softly chuckled; chuckled; looking looking as as like like a a malevolent malevolent baboon, baboon, i i thought, thought, as as anything anything human human could could look. look. 'you see,' see,' he he said, said, still still hugging hugging himself himself in in that that unpleasant unpleasant way, way, and and shaking shaking his his head head at at me, me, 'you're 'you're quite quite a a dangerous dangerous rival, rival, master master copperfield. copperfield. you always always was, was, you know.' know.' 'do 'do you set set a a watch watch upon upon miss miss wickfield, wickfield, and and make make her her home home no no home, home, because because of of me?' me?' said said i. i. 'oh! 'oh! master master copperfield! copperfield! those those are are very very arsh arsh words,' words,' he he replied. replied. 'put 'put my my meaning meaning into into any any words words you like,' like,' said said i. i. 'you know know what what it it is, is, uriah, uriah, as as well well as as i i do.' do.' 'oh 'oh no! no! you must must put put it it into into words,' words,' he he said. said. 'oh, 'oh, really! really! i i couldn't couldn't myself.' myself.' 'do 'do you suppose,' suppose,' said said i, i, constraining constraining myself myself to to be be very very temperate temperate and and quiet quiet with with him, him, on on account account of of agnes, agnes, 'that 'that i i regard regard miss miss wickfield wickfield otherwise otherwise than than as as a a very very dear dear sister?' sister?' 'well, 'well, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replied, replied, 'you perceive perceive i i am am not not bound bound to to answer answer that that question. question. you may may not, not, you know. know. but but then, then, you see, see, you may!' may!' anything anything to to equal equal the the low low cunning cunning of of his his visage, visage, and and of of his his shadowless shadowless eyes eyes without without the the ghost ghost of of an an eyelash, eyelash, i i never never saw. saw. 'come 'come then!' then!' said said i. i. 'for 'for the the sake sake of of miss miss wickfield wickfield -- -- ' ' 'my 'my agnes!' agnes!' he he exclaimed, exclaimed, with with a a sickly, sickly, angular angular contortion contortion of of himself. himself. 'would 'would you be be so so good good as as call call her her agnes, agnes, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' 'for 'for the the sake sake of of agnes agnes wickfield wickfield -- -- heaven heaven bless bless her!' her!' 'thank 'thank you for for that that blessing, blessing, master master copperfield!'he copperfield!'he interposed. interposed. 'i 'i will will tell tell you what what i i should, should, under under any any other other circumstances, circumstances, as as soon soon have have thought thought of of telling telling to to -- -- jack jack ketch.' ketch.' 'to 'to who, who, sir?' sir?' said said uriah, uriah, stretching stretching out out his his neck, neck, and and shading shading his his ear ear with with his his hand. hand. 'to 'to the the hangman,' hangman,' i i returned. returned. 'the 'the most most unlikely unlikely person person i i could could think think of,' of,' -- -- though though his his own own face face had had suggested suggested the the allusion allusion quite quite as as a a natural natural sequence. sequence. 'i 'i am am engaged engaged to to another another young young lady. lady. i i hope hope that that contents contents you.' 'upon 'upon your your soul?' soul?' said said uriah. uriah. i i was was about about indignantly indignantly to to give give my my assertion assertion the the confirmation confirmation he he required, required, when when he he caught caught hold hold of of my my hand, hand, and and gave gave it it a a squeeze. squeeze. 'oh, 'oh, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' he he said. said. 'if 'if you had had only only had had the the condescension condescension to to return return my my confidence confidence when when i i poured poured out out the the fulness fulness of of my my art, art, the the night night i i put put you so so much much out out of of the the way way by by sleeping sleeping before before your your sitting-room sitting-room fire, fire, i i never never should should have have doubted doubted you. as as it it is, is, i'm i'm sure sure i'll i'll take take off off mother mother directly, directly, and and only only too too appy. appy. i i know know you'll you'll excuse excuse the the precautions precautions of of affection, affection, won't won't you? what what a a pity, pity, master master copperfield, copperfield, that that you didn't didn't condescend condescend to to return return my my confidence! confidence! i'm i'm sure sure i i gave gave you every every opportunity. opportunity. but but you never never have have condescended condescended to to me, me, as as much much as as i i could could have have wished. wished. i i know know you have have never never liked liked me, me, as as i i have have liked liked you!' all all this this time time he he was was squeezing squeezing my my hand hand with with his his damp damp fishy fishy fingers, fingers, while while i i made made every every effort effort i i decently decently could could to to get get it it away. away. but but i i was was quite quite unsuccessful. unsuccessful. he he drew drew it it under under the the sleeve sleeve of of his his mulberry-coloured mulberry-coloured great-coat, great-coat, and and i i walked walked on, on, almost almost upon upon compulsion, compulsion, arm-in-arm arm-in-arm with with him. him. 'shall 'shall we we turn?' turn?' said said uriah, uriah, by by and and by by wheeling wheeling me me face face about about towards towards the the town, town, on on which which the the early early moon moon was was now now shining, shining, silvering silvering the the distant distant windows. windows. 'before 'before we we leave leave the the subject, subject, you ought ought to to understand,' understand,' said said i, i, breaking breaking a a pretty pretty long long silence, silence, 'that 'that i i believe believe agnes agnes wickfield wickfield to to be be as as far far above above you, and and as as far far removed removed from from all all your your aspirations, aspirations, as as that that moon moon herself!' herself!' 'peaceful! 'peaceful! ain't ain't she!' she!' said said uriah. uriah. 'very! 'very! now now confess, confess, master master copperfield, copperfield, that that you haven't haven't liked liked me me quite quite as as i i have have liked liked you. all all along along you've you've thought thought me me too too umble umble now, now, i i shouldn't shouldn't wonder?' wonder?' 'i 'i am am not not fond fond of of professions professions of of humility,' humility,' i i returned, returned, 'or 'or professions professions of of anything anything else.' else.' 'there 'there now!' now!' said said uriah, uriah, looking looking flabby flabby and and lead-coloured lead-coloured in in the the moonlight. moonlight. 'didn't 'didn't i i know know it! it! but but how how little little you think think of of the the rightful rightful umbleness umbleness of of a a person person in in my my station, station, master master copperfield! copperfield! father father and and me me was was both both brought brought up up at at a a foundation foundation school school for for boys; boys; and and mother, mother, she she was was likewise likewise brought brought up up at at a a public, public, sort sort of of charitable, charitable, establishment. establishment. they they taught taught us us all all a a deal deal of of umbleness umbleness -- -- not not much much else else that that i i know know of, of, from from morning morning to to night. night. we we was was to to be be umble umble to to this this person, person, and and umble umble to to that; that; and and to to pull pull off off our our caps caps here, here, and and to to make make bows bows there; there; and and always always to to know know our our place, place, and and abase abase ourselves ourselves before before our our betters. betters. and and we we had had such such a a lot lot of of betters! betters! father father got got the the monitor-medal monitor-medal by by being being umble. umble. so so did did i. i. father father got got made made a a sexton sexton by by being being umble. umble. he he had had the the character, character, among among the the gentlefolks, gentlefolks, of of being being such such a a well-behaved well-behaved man, man, that that they they were were determined determined to to bring bring him him in. in. "be "be umble, umble, uriah," uriah," says says father father to to me, me, "and "and you'll you'll get get on. on. it it was was what what was was always always being being dinned dinned into into you and and me me at at school; school; it's it's what what goes goes down down best. best. be be umble," umble," says says father, father, "and "and you'll you'll do!" do!" and and really really it it ain't ain't done done bad!' bad!' it it was was the the first first time time it it had had ever ever occurred occurred to to me, me, that that this this detestable detestable cant cant of of false false humility humility might might have have originated originated out out of of the the heep heep family. family. i i had had seen seen the the harvest, harvest, but but had had never never thought thought of of the the seed. seed. 'when 'when i i was was quite quite a a young young boy,' boy,' said said uriah, uriah, 'i 'i got got to to know know what what umbleness umbleness did, did, and and i i took took to to it. it. i i ate ate umble umble pie pie with with an an appetite. appetite. i i stopped stopped at at the the umble umble point point of of my my learning, learning, and and says says i, i, "hold "hold hard!" hard!" when when you offered offered to to teach teach me me latin, latin, i i knew knew better. better. "people "people like like to to be be above above you," says says father, father, "keep "keep yourself yourself down." down." i i am am very very umble umble to to the the present present moment, moment, master master copperfield, copperfield, but but i've i've got got a a little little power!' power!' and and he he said said all all this this -- -- i i knew, knew, as as i i saw saw his his face face in in the the moonlight moonlight -- -- that that i i might might understand understand he he was was resolved resolved to to recompense recompense himself himself by by using using his his power. power. i i had had never never doubted doubted his his meanness, meanness, his his craft craft and and malice; malice; but but i i fully fully comprehended comprehended now, now, for for the the first first time, time, what what a a base, base, unrelenting, unrelenting, and and revengeful revengeful spirit, spirit, must must have have been been engendered engendered by by this this early, early, and and this this long, long, suppression. suppression. his his account account of of himself himself was was so so far far attended attended with with an an agreeable agreeable result, result, that that it it led led to to his his withdrawing withdrawing his his hand hand in in order order that that he he might might have have another another hug hug of of himself himself under under the the chin. chin. once once apart apart from from him, him, i i was was determined determined to to keep keep apart; apart; and and we we walked walked back, back, side side by by side, side, saying saying very very little little more more by by the the way. way. whether whether his his spirits spirits were were elevated elevated by by the the communication communication i i had had made made to to him, him, or or by by his his having having indulged indulged in in this this retrospect, retrospect, i i don't don't know; know; but but they they were were raised raised by by some some influence. influence. he he talked talked more more at at dinner dinner than than was was usual usual with with him; him; asked asked his his mother mother (off (off duty, duty, from from the the moment moment of of our our re-entering re-entering the the house) house) whether whether he he was was not not growing growing too too old old for for a a bachelor; bachelor; and and once once looked looked at at agnes agnes so, so, that that i i would would have have given given all all i i had, had, for for leave leave to to knock knock him him down. down. when when we we three three males males were were left left alone alone after after dinner, dinner, he he got got into into a a more more adventurous adventurous state. state. he he had had taken taken little little or or no no wine; wine; and and i i presume presume it it was was the the mere mere insolence insolence of of triumph triumph that that was was upon upon him, him, flushed flushed perhaps perhaps by by the the temptation temptation my my presence presence furnished furnished to to its its exhibition. exhibition. i i had had observed observed yesterday, yesterday, that that he he tried tried to to entice entice mr. mr. wickfield wickfield to to drink; drink; and, and, interpreting interpreting the the look look which which agnes agnes had had given given me me as as she she went went out, out, had had limited limited myself myself to to one one glass, glass, and and then then proposed proposed that that we we should should follow follow her. her. i i would would have have done done so so again again today; today; but but uriah uriah was was too too quick quick for for me. me. 'we 'we seldom seldom see see our our present present visitor, visitor, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, addressing addressing mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sitting, sitting, such such a a contrast contrast to to him, him, at at the the end end of of the the table, table, 'and 'and i i should should propose propose to to give give him him welcome welcome in in another another glass glass or or two two of of wine, wine, if if you have have no no objections. objections. mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, your your elth elth and and appiness!' appiness!' i i was was obliged obliged to to make make a a show show of of taking taking the the hand hand he he stretched stretched across across to to me; me; and and then, then, with with very very different different emotions, emotions, i i took took the the hand hand of of the the broken broken gentleman, gentleman, his his partner. partner. 'come, 'come, fellow-partner,' fellow-partner,' said said uriah, uriah, 'if 'if i i may may take take the the liberty, liberty, -- -- now, now, suppose suppose you give give us us something something or or another another appropriate appropriate to to copperfield!' copperfield!' i i pass pass over over mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's proposing proposing my my aunt, aunt, his his proposing proposing mr. mr. dick, dick, his his proposing proposing doctors' doctors' commons, commons, his his proposing proposing uriah, uriah, his his drinking drinking everything everything twice; twice; his his consciousness consciousness of of his his own own weakness, weakness, the the ineffectual ineffectual effort effort that that he he made made against against it; it; the the struggle struggle between between his his shame shame in in uriah's uriah's deportment, deportment, and and his his desire desire to to conciliate conciliate him; him; the the manifest manifest exultation exultation with with which which uriah uriah twisted twisted and and turned, turned, and and held held him him up up before before me. me. it it made made me me sick sick at at heart heart to to see, see, and and my my hand hand recoils recoils from from writing writing it. it. 'come, 'come, fellow-partner!' fellow-partner!' said said uriah, uriah, at at last, last, 'i'll 'i'll give give you another another one, one, and and i i umbly umbly ask ask for for bumpers, bumpers, seeing seeing i i intend intend to to make make it it the the divinest divinest of of her her sex.' sex.' her her father father had had his his empty empty glass glass in in his his hand. hand. i i saw saw him him set set it it down, down, look look at at the the picture picture she she was was so so like, like, put put his his hand hand to to his his forehead, forehead, and and shrink shrink back back in in his his elbow-chair. elbow-chair. 'i'm 'i'm an an umble umble individual individual to to give give you her her elth,' elth,' proceeded proceeded uriah, uriah, 'but 'but i i admire admire -- -- adore adore her.' her.' no no physical physical pain pain that that her her father's father's grey grey head head could could have have borne, borne, i i think, think, could could have have been been more more terrible terrible to to me, me, than than the the mental mental endurance endurance i i saw saw compressed compressed now now within within both both his his hands. hands. 'agnes,' 'agnes,' said said uriah, uriah, either either not not regarding regarding him, him, or or not not knowing knowing what what the the nature nature of of his his action action was, was, 'agnes 'agnes wickfield wickfield is, is, i i am am safe safe to to say, say, the the divinest divinest of of her her sex. sex. may may i i speak speak out, out, among among friends? friends? to to be be her her father father is is a a proud proud distinction, distinction, but but to to be be her her usband usband -- -- ' ' spare spare me me from from ever ever again again hearing hearing such such a a cry, cry, as as that that with with which which her her father father rose rose up up from from the the table! table! 'what's 'what's the the matter?' matter?' said said uriah, uriah, turning turning of of a a deadly deadly colour. colour. 'you are are not not gone gone mad, mad, after after all, all, mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, i i hope? hope? if if i i say say i've i've an an ambition ambition to to make make your your agnes agnes my my agnes, agnes, i i have have as as good good a a right right to to it it as as another another man. man. i i have have a a better better right right to to it it than than any any other other man!' man!' i i had had my my arms arms round round mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, imploring imploring him him by by everything everything that that i i could could think think of, of, oftenest oftenest of of all all by by his his love love for for agnes, agnes, to to calm calm himself himself a a little. little. he he was was mad mad for for the the moment; moment; tearing tearing out out his his hair, hair, beating beating his his head, head, trying trying to to force force me me from from him, him, and and to to force force himself himself from from me, me, not not answering answering a a word, word, not not looking looking at at or or seeing seeing anyone; anyone; blindly blindly striving striving for for he he knew knew not not what, what, his his face face all all staring staring and and distorted distorted -- -- a a frightful frightful spectacle. spectacle. i i conjured conjured him, him, incoherently, incoherently, but but in in the the most most impassioned impassioned manner, manner, not not to to abandon abandon himself himself to to this this wildness, wildness, but but to to hear hear me. me. i i besought besought him him to to think think of of agnes, agnes, to to connect connect me me with with agnes, agnes, to to recollect recollect how how agnes agnes and and i i had had grown grown up up together, together, how how i i honoured honoured her her and and loved loved her, her, how how she she was was his his pride pride and and joy. joy. i i tried tried to to bring bring her her idea idea before before him him in in any any form; form; i i even even reproached reproached him him with with not not having having firmness firmness to to spare spare her her the the knowledge knowledge of of such such a a scene scene as as this. this. i i may may have have effected effected something, something, or or his his wildness wildness may may have have spent spent itself; itself; but but by by degrees degrees he he struggled struggled less, less, and and began began to to look look at at me me -- -- strangely strangely at at first, first, then then with with recognition recognition in in his his eyes. eyes. at at length length he he said, said, 'i 'i know, know, trotwood! trotwood! my my darling darling child child and and you -- -- i i know! know! but but look look at at him!' him!' he he pointed pointed to to uriah, uriah, pale pale and and glowering glowering in in a a corner, corner, evidently evidently very very much much out out in in his his calculations, calculations, and and taken taken by by surprise. surprise. 'look 'look at at my my torturer,' torturer,' he he replied. replied. 'before 'before him him i i have have step step by by step step abandoned abandoned name name and and reputation, reputation, peace peace and and quiet, quiet, house house and and home.' home.' 'i 'i have have kept kept your your name name and and reputation reputation for for you, and and your your peace peace and and quiet, quiet, and and your your house house and and home home too,' too,' said said uriah, uriah, with with a a sulky, sulky, hurried, hurried, defeated defeated air air of of compromise. compromise. 'don't 'don't be be foolish, foolish, mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. if if i i have have gone gone a a little little beyond beyond what what you were were prepared prepared for, for, i i can can go go back, back, i i suppose? suppose? there's there's no no harm harm done.' done.' 'i 'i looked looked for for single single motives motives in in everyone,' everyone,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, and and i i was was satisfied satisfied i i had had bound bound him him to to me me by by motives motives of of interest. interest. but but see see what what he he is is -- -- oh, oh, see see what what he he is!' is!' 'you had had better better stop stop him, him, copperfield, copperfield, if if you can,' can,' cried cried uriah, uriah, with with his his long long forefinger forefinger pointing pointing towards towards me. me. 'he'll 'he'll say say something something presently presently -- -- mind mind you! -- -- he'll he'll be be sorry sorry to to have have said said afterwards, afterwards, and and you'll you'll be be sorry sorry to to have have heard!' heard!' 'i'll 'i'll say say anything!' anything!' cried cried mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, with with a a desperate desperate air. air. 'why 'why should should i i not not be be in in all all the the world's world's power power if if i i am am in in yours?' yours?' 'mind! 'mind! i i tell tell you!' said said uriah, uriah, continuing continuing to to warn warn me. me. 'if 'if you don't don't stop stop his his mouth, mouth, you're you're not not his his friend! friend! why why shouldn't shouldn't you be be in in all all the the world's world's power, power, mr. mr. wickfield? wickfield? because because you have have got got a a daughter. daughter. you and and me me know know what what we we know, know, don't don't we? we? let let sleeping sleeping dogs dogs lie lie -- -- who who wants wants to to rouse rouse 'em? 'em? i i don't. don't. can't can't you see see i i am am as as umble umble as as i i can can be? be? i i tell tell you, if if i've i've gone gone too too far, far, i'm i'm sorry. sorry. what what would would you have, have, sir?' sir?' 'oh, 'oh, trotwood, trotwood, trotwood!'exclaimed trotwood!'exclaimed mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, wringing wringing his his hands. hands. 'what 'what i i have have come come down down to to be, be, since since i i first first saw saw you in in this this house! house! i i was was on on my my downward downward way way then, then, but but the the dreary, dreary, dreary dreary road road i i have have traversed traversed since! since! weak weak indulgence indulgence has has ruined ruined me. me. indulgence indulgence in in remembrance, remembrance, and and indulgence indulgence in in forgetfulness. forgetfulness. my my natural natural grief grief for for my my child's child's mother mother turned turned to to disease; disease; my my natural natural love love for for my my child child turned turned to to disease. disease. i i have have infected infected everything everything i i touched. touched. i i have have brought brought misery misery on on what what i i dearly dearly love, love, i i know know -- -- you know! know! i i thought thought it it possible possible that that i i could could truly truly love love one one creature creature in in the the world, world, and and not not love love the the rest; rest; i i thought thought it it possible possible that that i i could could truly truly mourn mourn for for one one creature creature gone gone out out of of the the world, world, and and not not have have some some part part in in the the grief grief of of all all who who mourned. mourned. thus thus the the lessons lessons of of my my life life have have been been perverted! perverted! i i have have preyed preyed on on my my own own morbid morbid coward coward heart, heart, and and it it has has preyed preyed on on me. me. sordid sordid in in my my grief, grief, sordid sordid in in my my love, love, sordid sordid in in my my miserable miserable escape escape from from the the darker darker side side of of both, both, oh oh see see the the ruin ruin i i am, am, and and hate hate me, me, shun shun me!' me!' he he dropped dropped into into a a chair, chair, and and weakly weakly sobbed. sobbed. the the excitement excitement into into which which he he had had been been roused roused was was leaving leaving him. him. uriah uriah came came out out of of his his corner. corner. 'i 'i don't don't know know all all i i have have done, done, in in my my fatuity,' fatuity,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, putting putting out out his his hands, hands, as as if if to to deprecate deprecate my my condemnation. condemnation. 'he 'he knows knows best,' best,' meaning meaning uriah uriah heep, heep, 'for 'for he he has has always always been been at at my my elbow, elbow, whispering whispering me. me. you see see the the millstone millstone that that he he is is about about my my neck. neck. you find find him him in in my my house, house, you find find him him in in my my business. business. you heard heard him, him, but but a a little little time time ago. ago. what what need need have have i i to to say say more!' more!' 'you haven't haven't need need to to say say so so much, much, nor nor half half so so much, much, nor nor anything anything at at all,' all,' observed observed uriah, uriah, half half defiant, defiant, and and half half fawning. fawning. 'you wouldn't wouldn't have have took took it it up up so, so, if if it it hadn't hadn't been been for for the the wine. wine. you'll you'll think think better better of of it it tomorrow, tomorrow, sir. sir. if if i i have have said said too too much, much, or or more more than than i i meant, meant, what what of of it? it? i i haven't haven't stood stood by by it!' it!' the the door door opened, opened, and and agnes, agnes, gliding gliding in, in, without without a a vestige vestige of of colour colour in in her her face, face, put put her her arm arm round round his his neck, neck, and and steadily steadily said, said, 'papa, 'papa, you are are not not well. well. come come with with me!' me!' he he laid laid his his head head upon upon her her shoulder, shoulder, as as if if he he were were oppressed oppressed with with heavy heavy shame, shame, and and went went out out with with her. her. her her eyes eyes met met mine mine for for but but an an instant, instant, yet yet i i saw saw how how much much she she knew knew of of what what had had passed. passed. 'i 'i didn't didn't expect expect he'd he'd cut cut up up so so rough, rough, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah. uriah. 'but 'but it's it's nothing. nothing. i'll i'll be be friends friends with with him him tomorrow. tomorrow. it's it's for for his his good. good. i'm i'm umbly umbly anxious anxious for for his his good.' good.' i i gave gave him him no no answer, answer, and and went went upstairs upstairs into into the the quiet quiet room room where where agnes agnes had had so so often often sat sat beside beside me me at at my my books. books. nobody nobody came came near near me me until until late late at at night. night. i i took took up up a a book, book, and and tried tried to to read. read. i i heard heard the the clocks clocks strike strike twelve, twelve, and and was was still still reading, reading, without without knowing knowing what what i i read, read, when when agnes agnes touched touched me. me. 'you will will be be going going early early in in the the morning, morning, trotwood! trotwood! let let us us say say good-bye, good-bye, now!' now!' she she had had been been weeping, weeping, but but her her face face then then was was so so calm calm and and beautiful! beautiful! 'heaven 'heaven bless bless you!' she she said, said, giving giving me me her her hand. hand. 'dearest 'dearest agnes!' agnes!' i i returned, returned, 'i 'i see see you ask ask me me not not to to speak speak of of tonight tonight -- -- but but is is there there nothing nothing to to be be done?' done?' 'there 'there is is god god to to trust trust in!' in!' she she replied. replied. 'can 'can i i do do nothing nothing -- -- i, i, who who come come to to you with with my my poor poor sorrows?' sorrows?' 'and 'and make make mine mine so so much much lighter,' lighter,' she she replied. replied. 'dear 'dear trotwood, trotwood, no!' no!' 'dear 'dear agnes,' agnes,' i i said, said, 'it 'it is is presumptuous presumptuous for for me, me, who who am am so so poor poor in in all all in in which which you are are so so rich rich -- -- goodness, goodness, resolution, resolution, all all noble noble qualities qualities -- -- to to doubt doubt or or direct direct you; but but you know know how how much much i i love love you, and and how how much much i i owe owe you. you will will never never sacrifice sacrifice yourself yourself to to a a mistaken mistaken sense sense of of duty, duty, agnes?' agnes?' more more agitated agitated for for a a moment moment than than i i had had ever ever seen seen her, her, she she took took her her hands hands from from me, me, and and moved moved a a step step back. back. 'say 'say you have have no no such such thought, thought, dear dear agnes! agnes! much much more more than than sister! sister! think think of of the the priceless priceless gift gift of of such such a a heart heart as as yours, yours, of of such such a a love love as as yours!' yours!' oh! oh! long, long, long long afterwards, afterwards, i i saw saw that that face face rise rise up up before before me, me, with with its its momentary momentary look, look, not not wondering, wondering, not not accusing, accusing, not not regretting. regretting. oh, oh, long, long, long long afterwards, afterwards, i i saw saw that that look look subside, subside, as as it it did did now, now, into into the the lovely lovely smile, smile, with with which which she she told told me me she she had had no no fear fear for for herself herself -- -- i i need need have have none none for for her her -- -- and and parted parted from from me me by by the the name name of of brother, brother, and and was was gone! gone! it it was was dark dark in in the the morning, morning, when when i i got got upon upon the the coach coach at at the the inn inn door. door. the the day day was was just just breaking breaking when when we we were were about about to to start, start, and and then, then, as as i i sat sat thinking thinking of of her, her, came came struggling struggling up up the the coach coach side, side, through through the the mingled mingled day day and and night, night, uriah's uriah's head. head. 'copperfield!' 'copperfield!' said said he, he, in in a a croaking croaking whisper, whisper, as as he he hung hung by by the the iron iron on on the the roof, roof, 'i 'i thought thought you'd you'd be be glad glad to to hear hear before before you went went off, off, that that there there are are no no squares squares broke broke between between us. us. i've i've been been into into his his room room already, already, and and we've we've made made it it all all smooth. smooth. why, why, though though i'm i'm umble, umble, i'm i'm useful useful to to him, him, you know; know; and and he he understands understands his his interest interest when when he he isn't isn't in in liquor! liquor! what what an an agreeable agreeable man man he he is, is, after after all, all, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' i i obliged obliged myself myself to to say say that that i i was was glad glad he he had had made made his his apology. apology. 'oh, 'oh, to to be be sure!' sure!' said said uriah. uriah. 'when 'when a a person's person's umble, umble, you know, know, what's what's an an apology? apology? so so easy! easy! i i say! say! i i suppose,' suppose,' with with a a jerk, jerk, 'you have have sometimes sometimes plucked plucked a a pear pear before before it it was was ripe, ripe, master master copperfield?' copperfield?' 'i 'i suppose suppose i i have,' have,' i i replied. replied. 'i 'i did did that that last last night,' night,' said said uriah; uriah; 'but 'but it'll it'll ripen ripen yet! yet! it it only only wants wants attending attending to. to. i i can can wait!' wait!' profuse profuse in in his his farewells, farewells, he he got got down down again again as as the the coachman coachman got got up. up. for for anything anything i i know, know, he he was was eating eating something something to to keep keep the the raw raw morning morning air air out; out; but but he he made made motions motions with with his his mouth mouth as as if if the the pear pear were were ripe ripe already, already, and and he he were were smacking smacking his his lips lips over over it. it. chapter chapter 40. 40. the the wanderer wanderer we we had had a a very very serious serious conversation conversation in in buckingham buckingham street street that that night, night, about about the the domestic domestic occurrences occurrences i i have have detailed detailed in in the the last last chapter. chapter. my my aunt aunt was was deeply deeply interested interested in in them, them, and and walked walked up up and and down down the the room room with with her her arms arms folded, folded, for for more more than than two two hours hours afterwards. afterwards. whenever whenever she she was was particularly particularly discomposed, discomposed, she she always always performed performed one one of of these these pedestrian pedestrian feats; feats; and and the the amount amount of of her her discomposure discomposure might might always always be be estimated estimated by by the the duration duration of of her her walk. walk. on on this this occasion occasion she she was was so so much much disturbed disturbed in in mind mind as as to to find find it it necessary necessary to to open open the the bedroom bedroom door, door, and and make make a a course course for for herself, herself, comprising comprising the the full full extent extent of of the the bedrooms bedrooms from from wall wall to to wall; wall; and and while while mr. mr. dick dick and and i i sat sat quietly quietly by by the the fire, fire, she she kept kept passing passing in in and and out, out, along along this this measured measured track, track, at at an an unchanging unchanging pace, pace, with with the the regularity regularity of of a a clock-pendulum. clock-pendulum. when when my my aunt aunt and and i i were were left left to to ourselves ourselves by by mr. mr. dick's dick's going going out out to to bed, bed, i i sat sat down down to to write write my my letter letter to to the the two two old old ladies. ladies. by by that that time time she she was was tired tired of of walking, walking, and and sat sat by by the the fire fire with with her her dress dress tucked tucked up up as as usual. usual. but but instead instead of of sitting sitting in in her her usual usual manner, manner, holding holding her her glass glass upon upon her her knee, knee, she she suffered suffered it it to to stand stand neglected neglected on on the the chimney-piece; chimney-piece; and, and, resting resting her her left left elbow elbow on on her her right right arm, arm, and and her her chin chin on on her her left left hand, hand, looked looked thoughtfully thoughtfully at at me. me. as as often often as as i i raised raised my my eyes eyes from from what what i i was was about, about, i i met met hers. hers. 'i 'i am am in in the the lovingest lovingest of of tempers, tempers, my my dear,' dear,' she she would would assure assure me me with with a a nod, nod, 'but 'but i i am am fidgeted fidgeted and and sorry!' sorry!' i i had had been been too too busy busy to to observe, observe, until until after after she she was was gone gone to to bed, bed, that that she she had had left left her her night-mixture, night-mixture, as as she she always always called called it, it, untasted untasted on on the the chimney-piece. chimney-piece. she she came came to to her her door, door, with with even even more more than than her her usual usual affection affection of of manner, manner, when when i i knocked knocked to to acquaint acquaint her her with with this this discovery; discovery; but but only only said, said, 'i 'i have have not not the the heart heart to to take take it, it, trot, trot, tonight,' tonight,' and and shook shook her her head, head, and and went went in in again. again. she she read read my my letter letter to to the the two two old old ladies, ladies, in in the the morning, morning, and and approved approved of of it. it. i i posted posted it, it, and and had had nothing nothing to to do do then, then, but but wait, wait, as as patiently patiently as as i i could, could, for for the the reply. reply. i i was was still still in in this this state state of of expectation, expectation, and and had had been, been, for for nearly nearly a a week; week; when when i i left left the the doctor's doctor's one one snowy snowy night, night, to to walk walk home. home. it it had had been been a a bitter bitter day, day, and and a a cutting cutting north-east north-east wind wind had had blown blown for for some some time. time. the the wind wind had had gone gone down down with with the the light, light, and and so so the the snow snow had had come come on. on. it it was was a a heavy, heavy, settled settled fall, fall, i i recollect, recollect, in in great great flakes; flakes; and and it it lay lay thick. thick. the the noise noise of of wheels wheels and and tread tread of of people people were were as as hushed, hushed, as as if if the the streets streets had had been been strewn strewn that that depth depth with with feathers. feathers. my my shortest shortest way way home, home, -- -- and and i i naturally naturally took took the the shortest shortest way way on on such such a a night night -- -- was was through through st. st. martin's martin's lane. lane. now, now, the the church church which which gives gives its its name name to to the the lane, lane, stood stood in in a a less less free free situation situation at at that that time; time; there there being being no no open open space space before before it, it, and and the the lane lane winding winding down down to to the the strand. strand. as as i i passed passed the the steps steps of of the the portico, portico, i i encountered, encountered, at at the the corner, corner, a a woman's woman's face. face. it it looked looked in in mine, mine, passed passed across across the the narrow narrow lane, lane, and and disappeared. disappeared. i i knew knew it. it. i i had had seen seen it it somewhere. somewhere. but but i i could could not not remember remember where. where. i i had had some some association association with with it, it, that that struck struck upon upon my my heart heart directly; directly; but but i i was was thinking thinking of of anything anything else else when when it it came came upon upon me, me, and and was was confused. confused. on on the the steps steps of of the the church, church, there there was was the the stooping stooping figure figure of of a a man, man, who who had had put put down down some some burden burden on on the the smooth smooth snow, snow, to to adjust adjust it; it; my my seeing seeing the the face, face, and and my my seeing seeing him, him, were were simultaneous. simultaneous. i i don't don't think think i i had had stopped stopped in in my my surprise; surprise; but, but, in in any any case, case, as as i i went went on, on, he he rose, rose, turned, turned, and and came came down down towards towards me. me. i i stood stood face face to to face face with with mr. mr. peggotty! peggotty! then then i i remembered remembered the the woman. woman. it it was was martha, martha, to to whom whom emily emily had had given given the the money money that that night night in in the the kitchen. kitchen. martha martha endell endell -- -- side side by by side side with with whom, whom, he he would would not not have have seen seen his his dear dear niece, niece, ham ham had had told told me, me, for for all all the the treasures treasures wrecked wrecked in in the the sea. sea. we we shook shook hands hands heartily. heartily. at at first, first, neither neither of of us us could could speak speak a a word. word. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy!' davy!' he he said, said, gripping gripping me me tight, tight, 'it 'it do do my my art art good good to to see see you, sir. sir. well well met, met, well well met!' met!' 'well 'well met, met, my my dear dear old old friend!' friend!' said said i. i. 'i 'i had had my my thowts thowts o' o' coming coming to to make make inquiration inquiration for for you, sir, sir, tonight,' tonight,' he he said, said, 'but 'but knowing knowing as as your your aunt aunt was was living living along along wi' wi' you -- -- fur fur i've i've been been down down yonder yonder -- -- yarmouth yarmouth way way -- -- i i was was afeerd afeerd it it was was too too late. late. i i should should have have come come early early in in the the morning, morning, sir, sir, afore afore going going away.' away.' 'again?' 'again?' said said i. i. 'yes, 'yes, sir,' sir,' he he replied, replied, patiently patiently shaking shaking his his head, head, 'i'm 'i'm away away tomorrow.' tomorrow.' 'where 'where were were you going going now?' now?' i i asked. asked. 'well!' 'well!' he he replied, replied, shaking shaking the the snow snow out out of of his his long long hair, hair, 'i 'i was was a-going a-going to to turn turn in in somewheers.' somewheers.' in in those those days days there there was was a a side-entrance side-entrance to to the the stable-yard stable-yard of of the the golden golden cross, cross, the the inn inn so so memorable memorable to to me me in in connexion connexion with with his his misfortune, misfortune, nearly nearly opposite opposite to to where where we we stood. stood. i i pointed pointed out out the the gateway, gateway, put put my my arm arm through through his, his, and and we we went went across. across. two two or or three three public-rooms public-rooms opened opened out out of of the the stable-yard; stable-yard; and and looking looking into into one one of of them, them, and and finding finding it it empty, empty, and and a a good good fire fire burning, burning, i i took took him him in in there. there. when when i i saw saw him him in in the the light, light, i i observed, observed, not not only only that that his his hair hair was was long long and and ragged, ragged, but but that that his his face face was was burnt burnt dark dark by by the the sun. sun. he he was was greyer, greyer, the the lines lines in in his his face face and and forehead forehead were were deeper, deeper, and and he he had had every every appearance appearance of of having having toiled toiled and and wandered wandered through through all all varieties varieties of of weather; weather; but but he he looked looked very very strong, strong, and and like like a a man man upheld upheld by by steadfastness steadfastness of of purpose, purpose, whom whom nothing nothing could could tire tire out. out. he he shook shook the the snow snow from from his his hat hat and and clothes, clothes, and and brushed brushed it it away away from from his his face, face, while while i i was was inwardly inwardly making making these these remarks. remarks. as as he he sat sat down down opposite opposite to to me me at at a a table, table, with with his his back back to to the the door door by by which which we we had had entered, entered, he he put put out out his his rough rough hand hand again, again, and and grasped grasped mine mine warmly. warmly. 'i'll 'i'll tell tell you, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he said, said, -- -- 'wheer 'wheer all all i've i've been, been, and and what-all what-all we've we've heerd. heerd. i've i've been been fur, fur, and and we've we've heerd heerd little; little; but but i'll i'll tell tell you!' i i rang rang the the bell bell for for something something hot hot to to drink. drink. he he would would have have nothing nothing stronger stronger than than ale; ale; and and while while it it was was being being brought, brought, and and being being warmed warmed at at the the fire, fire, he he sat sat thinking. thinking. there there was was a a fine, fine, massive massive gravity gravity in in his his face, face, i i did did not not venture venture to to disturb. disturb. 'when 'when she she was was a a child,' child,' he he said, said, lifting lifting up up his his head head soon soon after after we we were were left left alone, alone, 'she 'she used used to to talk talk to to me me a a deal deal about about the the sea, sea, and and about about them them coasts coasts where where the the sea sea got got to to be be dark dark blue, blue, and and to to lay lay a-shining a-shining and and a-shining a-shining in in the the sun. sun. i i thowt, thowt, odd odd times, times, as as her her father father being being drownded drownded made made her her think think on on it it so so much. much. i i doen't doen't know, know, you see, see, but but maybe maybe she she believed believed -- -- or or hoped hoped -- -- he he had had drifted drifted out out to to them them parts, parts, where where the the flowers flowers is is always always a-blowing, a-blowing, and and the the country country bright.' bright.' 'it 'it is is likely likely to to have have been been a a childish childish fancy,' fancy,' i i replied. replied. 'when 'when she she was was -- -- lost,' lost,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i know'd know'd in in my my mind, mind, as as he he would would take take her her to to them them countries. countries. i i know'd know'd in in my my mind, mind, as as he'd he'd have have told told her her wonders wonders of of 'em, 'em, and and how how she she was was to to be be a a lady lady theer, theer, and and how how he he got got her her to to listen listen to to him him fust, fust, along along o' o' sech sech like. like. when when we we see see his his mother, mother, i i know'd know'd quite quite well well as as i i was was right. right. i i went went across-channel across-channel to to france, france, and and landed landed theer, theer, as as if if i'd i'd fell fell down down from from the the sky.' sky.' i i saw saw the the door door move, move, and and the the snow snow drift drift in. in. i i saw saw it it move move a a little little more, more, and and a a hand hand softly softly interpose interpose to to keep keep it it open. open. 'i 'i found found out out an an english english gen'leman gen'leman as as was was in in authority,' authority,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and told told him him i i was was a-going a-going to to seek seek my my niece. niece. he he got got me me them them papers papers as as i i wanted wanted fur fur to to carry carry me me through through -- -- i i doen't doen't rightly rightly know know how how they're they're called called -- -- and and he he would would have have give give me me money, money, but but that that i i was was thankful thankful to to have have no no need need on. on. i i thank thank him him kind, kind, for for all all he he done, done, i'm i'm sure! sure! "i've "i've wrote wrote afore afore you," he he says says to to me, me, "and "and i i shall shall speak speak to to many many as as will will come come that that way, way, and and many many will will know know you, fur fur distant distant from from here, here, when when you're you're a-travelling a-travelling alone." alone." i i told told him, him, best best as as i i was was able, able, what what my my gratitoode gratitoode was, was, and and went went away away through through france.' france.' 'alone, 'alone, and and on on foot?' foot?' said said i. i. 'mostly 'mostly a-foot,' a-foot,' he he rejoined; rejoined; 'sometimes 'sometimes in in carts carts along along with with people people going going to to market; market; sometimes sometimes in in empty empty coaches. coaches. many many mile mile a a day day a-foot, a-foot, and and often often with with some some poor poor soldier soldier or or another, another, travelling travelling to to see see his his friends. friends. i i couldn't couldn't talk talk to to him,' him,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'nor 'nor he he to to me; me; but but we we was was company company for for one one another, another, too, too, along along the the dusty dusty roads.' roads.' i i should should have have known known that that by by his his friendly friendly tone. tone. 'when 'when i i come come to to any any town,' town,' he he pursued, pursued, 'i 'i found found the the inn, inn, and and waited waited about about the the yard yard till till someone someone turned turned up up (someone (someone mostly mostly did) did) as as know'd know'd english. english. then then i i told told how how that that i i was was on on my my way way to to seek seek my my niece, niece, and and they they told told me me what what manner manner of of gentlefolks gentlefolks was was in in the the house, house, and and i i waited waited to to see see any any as as seemed seemed like like her, her, going going in in or or out. out. when when it it warn't warn't em'ly, em'ly, i i went went on on agen. agen. by by little little and and little, little, when when i i come come to to a a new new village village or or that, that, among among the the poor poor people, people, i i found found they they know'd know'd about about me. me. they they would would set set me me down down at at their their cottage cottage doors, doors, and and give give me me what-not what-not fur fur to to eat eat and and drink, drink, and and show show me me where where to to sleep; sleep; and and many many a a woman, woman, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, as as has has had had a a daughter daughter of of about about em'ly's em'ly's age, age, i've i've found found a-waiting a-waiting fur fur me, me, at at our our saviour's saviour's cross cross outside outside the the village, village, fur fur to to do do me me sim'lar sim'lar kindnesses. kindnesses. some some has has had had daughters daughters as as was was dead. dead. and and god god only only knows knows how how good good them them mothers mothers was was to to me!' me!' it it was was martha martha at at the the door. door. i i saw saw her her haggard, haggard, listening listening face face distinctly. distinctly. my my dread dread was was lest lest he he should should turn turn his his head, head, and and see see her her too. too. 'they 'they would would often often put put their their children children -- -- particular particular their their little little girls,' girls,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'upon 'upon my my knee; knee; and and many many a a time time you might might have have seen seen me me sitting sitting at at their their doors, doors, when when night night was was coming coming in, in, a'most a'most as as if if they'd they'd been been my my darling's darling's children. children. oh, oh, my my darling!' darling!' overpowered overpowered by by sudden sudden grief, grief, he he sobbed sobbed aloud. aloud. i i laid laid my my trembling trembling hand hand upon upon the the hand hand he he put put before before his his face. face. 'thankee, 'thankee, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, 'doen't 'doen't take take no no notice.' notice.' in in a a very very little little while while he he took took his his hand hand away away and and put put it it on on his his breast, breast, and and went went on on with with his his story. story. 'they 'they often often walked walked with with me,' me,' he he said, said, 'in 'in the the morning, morning, maybe maybe a a mile mile or or two two upon upon my my road; road; and and when when we we parted, parted, and and i i said, said, "i'm "i'm very very thankful thankful to to you! god god bless bless you!" they they always always seemed seemed to to understand, understand, and and answered answered pleasant. pleasant. at at last last i i come come to to the the sea. sea. it it warn't warn't hard, hard, you may may suppose, suppose, for for a a seafaring seafaring man man like like me me to to work work his his way way over over to to italy. italy. when when i i got got theer, theer, i i wandered wandered on on as as i i had had done done afore. afore. the the people people was was just just as as good good to to me, me, and and i i should should have have gone gone from from town town to to town, town, maybe maybe the the country country through, through, but but that that i i got got news news of of her her being being seen seen among among them them swiss swiss mountains mountains yonder. yonder. one one as as know'd know'd his his servant servant see see 'em 'em there, there, all all three, three, and and told told me me how how they they travelled, travelled, and and where where they they was. was. i i made made fur fur them them mountains, mountains, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, day day and and night. night. ever ever so so fur fur as as i i went, went, ever ever so so fur fur the the mountains mountains seemed seemed to to shift shift away away from from me. me. but but i i come come up up with with 'em, 'em, and and i i crossed crossed 'em. 'em. when when i i got got nigh nigh the the place place as as i i had had been been told told of, of, i i began began to to think think within within my my own own self, self, "what "what shall shall i i do do when when i i see see her?"' her?"' the the listening listening face, face, insensible insensible to to the the inclement inclement night, night, still still drooped drooped at at the the door, door, and and the the hands hands begged begged me me -- -- prayed prayed me me -- -- not not to to cast cast it it forth. forth. 'i 'i never never doubted doubted her,' her,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'no! 'no! not not a a bit! bit! on'y on'y let let her her see see my my face face -- -- on'y on'y let let her her heer heer my my voice voice -- -- on'y on'y let let my my stanning stanning still still afore afore her her bring bring to to her her thoughts thoughts the the home home she she had had fled fled away away from, from, and and the the child child she she had had been been -- -- and and if if she she had had growed growed to to be be a a royal royal lady, lady, she'd she'd have have fell fell down down at at my my feet! feet! i i know'd know'd it it well! well! many many a a time time in in my my sleep sleep had had i i heerd heerd her her cry cry out, out, "uncle!" "uncle!" and and seen seen her her fall fall like like death death afore afore me. me. many many a a time time in in my my sleep sleep had had i i raised raised her her up, up, and and whispered whispered to to her, her, "em'ly, "em'ly, my my dear, dear, i i am am come come fur fur to to bring bring forgiveness, forgiveness, and and to to take take you home!"' home!"' he he stopped stopped and and shook shook his his head, head, and and went went on on with with a a sigh. sigh. 'he 'he was was nowt nowt to to me me now. now. em'ly em'ly was was all. all. i i bought bought a a country country dress dress to to put put upon upon her; her; and and i i know'd know'd that, that, once once found, found, she she would would walk walk beside beside me me over over them them stony stony roads, roads, go go where where i i would, would, and and never, never, never, never, leave leave me me more. more. to to put put that that dress dress upon upon her, her, and and to to cast cast off off what what she she wore wore -- -- to to take take her her on on my my arm arm again, again, and and wander wander towards towards home home -- -- to to stop stop sometimes sometimes upon upon the the road, road, and and heal heal her her bruised bruised feet feet and and her her worse-bruised worse-bruised heart heart -- -- was was all all that that i i thowt thowt of of now. now. i i doen't doen't believe believe i i should should have have done done so so much much as as look look at at him. him. but, but, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, it it warn't warn't to to be be -- -- not not yet! yet! i i was was too too late, late, and and they they was was gone. gone. wheer, wheer, i i couldn't couldn't learn. learn. some some said said heer, heer, some some said said theer. theer. i i travelled travelled heer, heer, and and i i travelled travelled theer, theer, but but i i found found no no em'ly, em'ly, and and i i travelled travelled home.' home.' 'how 'how long long ago?' ago?' i i asked. asked. 'a 'a matter matter o' o' fower fower days,' days,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i 'i sighted sighted the the old old boat boat arter arter dark, dark, and and the the light light a-shining a-shining in in the the winder. winder. when when i i come come nigh nigh and and looked looked in in through through the the glass, glass, i i see see the the faithful faithful creetur creetur missis missis gummidge gummidge sittin' sittin' by by the the fire, fire, as as we we had had fixed fixed upon, upon, alone. alone. i i called called out, out, "doen't "doen't be be afeerd! afeerd! it's it's dan'l!" dan'l!" and and i i went went in. in. i i never never could could have have thowt thowt the the old old boat boat would would have have been been so so strange!' strange!' from from some some pocket pocket in in his his breast, breast, he he took took out, out, with with a a very very careful careful hand hand a a small small paper paper bundle bundle containing containing two two or or three three letters letters or or little little packets, packets, which which he he laid laid upon upon the the table. table. 'this 'this fust fust one one come,' come,' he he said, said, selecting selecting it it from from the the rest, rest, 'afore 'afore i i had had been been gone gone a a week. week. a a fifty fifty pound pound bank bank note, note, in in a a sheet sheet of of paper, paper, directed directed to to me, me, and and put put underneath underneath the the door door in in the the night. night. she she tried tried to to hide hide her her writing, writing, but but she she couldn't couldn't hide hide it it from from me!' me!' he he folded folded up up the the note note again, again, with with great great patience patience and and care, care, in in exactly exactly the the same same form, form, and and laid laid it it on on one one side. side. 'this 'this come come to to missis missis gummidge,' gummidge,' he he said, said, opening opening another, another, 'two 'two or or three three months months ago.'after ago.'after looking looking at at it it for for some some moments, moments, he he gave gave it it to to me, me, and and added added in in a a low low voice, voice, 'be 'be so so good good as as read read it, it, sir.' sir.' i i read read as as follows: follows: 'oh 'oh what what will will you feel feel when when you see see this this writing, writing, and and know know it it comes comes from from my my wicked wicked hand! hand! but but try, try, try try -- -- not not for for my my sake, sake, but but for for uncle's uncle's goodness, goodness, try try to to let let your your heart heart soften soften to to me, me, only only for for a a little little little little time! time! try, try, pray pray do, do, to to relent relent towards towards a a miserable miserable girl, girl, and and write write down down on on a a bit bit of of paper paper whether whether he he is is well, well, and and what what he he said said about about me me before before you left left off off ever ever naming naming me me among among yourselves yourselves -- -- and and whether, whether, of of a a night, night, when when it it is is my my old old time time of of coming coming home, home, you ever ever see see him him look look as as if if he he thought thought of of one one he he used used to to love love so so dear. dear. oh, oh, my my heart heart is is breaking breaking when when i i think think about about it! it! i i am am kneeling kneeling down down to to you, begging begging and and praying praying you not not to to be be as as hard hard with with me me as as i i deserve deserve -- -- as as i i well, well, well, well, know know i i deserve deserve -- -- but but to to be be so so gentle gentle and and so so good, good, as as to to write write down down something something of of him, him, and and to to send send it it to to me. me. you need need not not call call me me little, little, you need need not not call call me me by by the the name name i i have have disgraced; disgraced; but but oh, oh, listen listen to to my my agony, agony, and and have have mercy mercy on on me me so so far far as as to to write write me me some some word word of of uncle, uncle, never, never, never never to to be be seen seen in in this this world world by by my my eyes eyes again! again! 'dear, 'dear, if if your your heart heart is is hard hard towards towards me me -- -- justly justly hard, hard, i i know know -- -- but, but, listen, listen, if if it it is is hard, hard, dear, dear, ask ask him him i i have have wronged wronged the the most most -- -- him him whose whose wife wife i i was was to to have have been been -- -- before before you quite quite decide decide against against my my poor poor poor poor prayer! prayer! if if he he should should be be so so compassionate compassionate as as to to say say that that you might might write write something something for for me me to to read read -- -- i i think think he he would, would, oh, oh, i i think think he he would, would, if if you would would only only ask ask him, him, for for he he always always was was so so brave brave and and so so forgiving forgiving -- -- tell tell him him then then (but (but not not else), else), that that when when i i hear hear the the wind wind blowing blowing at at night, night, i i feel feel as as if if it it was was passing passing angrily angrily from from seeing seeing him him and and uncle, uncle, and and was was going going up up to to god god against against me. me. tell tell him him that that if if i i was was to to die die tomorrow tomorrow (and (and oh, oh, if if i i was was fit, fit, i i would would be be so so glad glad to to die!) die!) i i would would bless bless him him and and uncle uncle with with my my last last words, words, and and pray pray for for his his happy happy home home with with my my last last breath!' breath!' some some money money was was enclosed enclosed in in this this letter letter also. also. five five pounds. pounds. it it was was untouched untouched like like the the previous previous sum, sum, and and he he refolded refolded it it in in the the same same way. way. detailed detailed instructions instructions were were added added relative relative to to the the address address of of a a reply, reply, which, which, although although they they betrayed betrayed the the intervention intervention of of several several hands, hands, and and made made it it difficult difficult to to arrive arrive at at any any very very probable probable conclusion conclusion in in reference reference to to her her place place of of concealment, concealment, made made it it at at least least not not unlikely unlikely that that she she had had written written from from that that spot spot where where she she was was stated stated to to have have been been seen. seen. 'what 'what answer answer was was sent?' sent?' i i inquired inquired of of mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'missis 'missis gummidge,' gummidge,' he he returned, returned, 'not 'not being being a a good good scholar, scholar, sir, sir, ham ham kindly kindly drawed drawed it it out, out, and and she she made made a a copy copy on on it. it. they they told told her her i i was was gone gone to to seek seek her, her, and and what what my my parting parting words words was.' was.' 'is 'is that that another another letter letter in in your your hand?' hand?' said said i. i. 'it's 'it's money, money, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, unfolding unfolding it it a a little little way. way. 'ten 'ten pound, pound, you see. see. and and wrote wrote inside, inside, "from "from a a true true friend," friend," like like the the fust. fust. but but the the fust fust was was put put underneath underneath the the door, door, and and this this come come by by the the post, post, day day afore afore yesterday. yesterday. i'm i'm a-going a-going to to seek seek her her at at the the post-mark.' post-mark.' he he showed showed it it to to me. me. it it was was a a town town on on the the upper upper rhine. rhine. he he had had found found out, out, at at yarmouth, yarmouth, some some foreign foreign dealers dealers who who knew knew that that country, country, and and they they had had drawn drawn him him a a rude rude map map on on paper, paper, which which he he could could very very well well understand. understand. he he laid laid it it between between us us on on the the table; table; and, and, with with his his chin chin resting resting on on one one hand, hand, tracked tracked his his course course upon upon it it with with the the other. other. i i asked asked him him how how ham ham was? was? he he shook shook his his head. head. 'he 'he works,' works,' he he said, said, 'as 'as bold bold as as a a man man can. can. his his name's name's as as good, good, in in all all that that part, part, as as any any man's man's is, is, anywheres anywheres in in the the wureld. wureld. anyone's anyone's hand hand is is ready ready to to help help him, him, you understand, understand, and and his his is is ready ready to to help help them. them. he's he's never never been been heerd heerd fur fur to to complain. complain. but but my my sister's sister's belief belief is is ('twixt ('twixt ourselves) ourselves) as as it it has has cut cut him him deep.' deep.' 'poor 'poor fellow, fellow, i i can can believe believe it!' it!' 'he 'he ain't ain't no no care, care, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said mr. mr. peggotty peggotty in in a a solemn solemn whisper whisper -- -- 'kinder 'kinder no no care care no-how no-how for for his his life. life. when when a a man's man's wanted wanted for for rough rough sarvice sarvice in in rough rough weather, weather, he's he's theer. theer. when when there's there's hard hard duty duty to to be be done done with with danger danger in in it, it, he he steps steps for'ard for'ard afore afore all all his his mates. mates. and and yet yet he's he's as as gentle gentle as as any any child. child. there there ain't ain't a a child child in in yarmouth yarmouth that that doen't doen't know know him.' him.' he he gathered gathered up up the the letters letters thoughtfully, thoughtfully, smoothing smoothing them them with with his his hand; hand; put put them them into into their their little little bundle; bundle; and and placed placed it it tenderly tenderly in in his his breast breast again. again. the the face face was was gone gone from from the the door. door. i i still still saw saw the the snow snow drifting drifting in; in; but but nothing nothing else else was was there. there. 'well!' 'well!' he he said, said, looking looking to to his his bag, bag, 'having 'having seen seen you tonight, tonight, mas'r mas'r davy davy (and (and that that doos doos me me good!), good!), i i shall shall away away betimes betimes tomorrow tomorrow morning. morning. you have have seen seen what what i've i've got got heer'; heer'; putting putting his his hand hand on on where where the the little little packet packet lay; lay; 'all 'all that that troubles troubles me me is, is, to to think think that that any any harm harm might might come come to to me, me, afore afore that that money money was was give give back. back. if if i i was was to to die, die, and and it it was was lost, lost, or or stole, stole, or or elseways elseways made made away away with, with, and and it it was was never never know'd know'd by by him him but but what what i'd i'd took took it, it, i i believe believe the the t'other t'other wureld wureld wouldn't wouldn't hold hold me! me! i i believe believe i i must must come come back!' back!' he he rose, rose, and and i i rose rose too; too; we we grasped grasped each each other other by by the the hand hand again, again, before before going going out. out. 'i'd 'i'd go go ten ten thousand thousand mile,' mile,' he he said, said, 'i'd 'i'd go go till till i i dropped dropped dead, dead, to to lay lay that that money money down down afore afore him. him. if if i i do do that, that, and and find find my my em'ly, em'ly, i'm i'm content. content. if if i i doen't doen't find find her, her, maybe maybe she'll she'll come come to to hear, hear, sometime, sometime, as as her her loving loving uncle uncle only only ended ended his his search search for for her her when when he he ended ended his his life; life; and and if if i i know know her, her, even even that that will will turn turn her her home home at at last!' last!' as as he he went went out out into into the the rigorous rigorous night, night, i i saw saw the the lonely lonely figure figure flit flit away away before before us. us. i i turned turned him him hastily hastily on on some some pretence, pretence, and and held held him him in in conversation conversation until until it it was was gone. gone. he he spoke spoke of of a a traveller's traveller's house house on on the the dover dover road, road, where where he he knew knew he he could could find find a a clean, clean, plain plain lodging lodging for for the the night. night. i i went went with with him him over over westminster westminster bridge, bridge, and and parted parted from from him him on on the the surrey surrey shore. shore. everything everything seemed, seemed, to to my my imagination, imagination, to to be be hushed hushed in in reverence reverence for for him, him, as as he he resumed resumed his his solitary solitary journey journey through through the the snow. snow. i i returned returned to to the the inn inn yard, yard, and, and, impressed impressed by by my my remembrance remembrance of of the the face, face, looked looked awfully awfully around around for for it. it. it it was was not not there. there. the the snow snow had had covered covered our our late late footprints; footprints; my my new new track track was was the the only only one one to to be be seen; seen; and and even even that that began began to to die die away away (it (it snowed snowed so so fast) fast) as as i i looked looked back back over over my my shoulder. shoulder. chapter chapter 41. 41. dora's dora's aunts aunts at at last, last, an an answer answer came came from from the the two two old old ladies. ladies. they they presented presented their their compliments compliments to to mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and informed informed him him that that they they had had given given his his letter letter their their best best consideration, consideration, 'with 'with a a view view to to the the happiness happiness of of both both parties' parties' -- -- which which i i thought thought rather rather an an alarming alarming expression, expression, not not only only because because of of the the use use they they had had made made of of it it in in relation relation to to the the family family difference difference before-mentioned, before-mentioned, but but because because i i had had (and (and have have all all my my life) life) observed observed that that conventional conventional phrases phrases are are a a sort sort of of fireworks, fireworks, easily easily let let off, off, and and liable liable to to take take a a great great variety variety of of shapes shapes and and colours colours not not at at all all suggested suggested by by their their original original form. form. the the misses misses spenlow spenlow added added that that they they begged begged to to forbear forbear expressing, expressing, 'through 'through the the medium medium of of correspondence', correspondence', an an opinion opinion on on the the subject subject of of mr. mr. copperfield's copperfield's communication; communication; but but that that if if mr. mr. copperfield copperfield would would do do them them the the favour favour to to call, call, upon upon a a certain certain day day (accompanied, (accompanied, if if he he thought thought proper, proper, by by a a confidential confidential friend), friend), they they would would be be happy happy to to hold hold some some conversation conversation on on the the subject. subject. to to this this favour, favour, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield immediately immediately replied, replied, with with his his respectful respectful compliments, compliments, that that he he would would have have the the honour honour of of waiting waiting on on the the misses misses spenlow, spenlow, at at the the time time appointed; appointed; accompanied, accompanied, in in accordance accordance with with their their kind kind permission, permission, by by his his friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles of of the the inner inner temple. temple. having having dispatched dispatched which which missive, missive, mr. mr. copperfield copperfield fell fell into into a a condition condition of of strong strong nervous nervous agitation; agitation; and and so so remained remained until until the the day day arrived. arrived. it it was was a a great great augmentation augmentation of of my my uneasiness uneasiness to to be be bereaved, bereaved, at at this this eventful eventful crisis, crisis, of of the the inestimable inestimable services services of of miss miss mills. mills. but but mr. mr. mills, mills, who who was was always always doing doing something something or or other other to to annoy annoy me me -- -- or or i i felt felt as as if if he he were, were, which which was was the the same same thing thing -- -- had had brought brought his his conduct conduct to to a a climax, climax, by by taking taking it it into into his his head head that that he he would would go go to to india. india. why why should should he he go go to to india, india, except except to to harass harass me? me? to to be be sure sure he he had had nothing nothing to to do do with with any any other other part part of of the the world, world, and and had had a a good good deal deal to to do do with with that that part; part; being being entirely entirely in in the the india india trade, trade, whatever whatever that that was was (i (i had had floating floating dreams dreams myself myself concerning concerning golden golden shawls shawls and and elephants' elephants' teeth); teeth); having having been been at at calcutta calcutta in in his his youth; youth; and and designing designing now now to to go go out out there there again, again, in in the the capacity capacity of of resident resident partner. partner. but but this this was was nothing nothing to to me. me. however, however, it it was was so so much much to to him him that that for for india india he he was was bound, bound, and and julia julia with with him; him; and and julia julia went went into into the the country country to to take take leave leave of of her her relations; relations; and and the the house house was was put put into into a a perfect perfect suit suit of of bills, bills, announcing announcing that that it it was was to to be be let let or or sold, sold, and and that that the the furniture furniture (mangle (mangle and and all) all) was was to to be be taken taken at at a a valuation. valuation. so, so, here here was was another another earthquake earthquake of of which which i i became became the the sport, sport, before before i i had had recovered recovered from from the the shock shock of of its its predecessor! predecessor! i i was was in in several several minds minds how how to to dress dress myself myself on on the the important important day; day; being being divided divided between between my my desire desire to to appear appear to to advantage, advantage, and and my my apprehensions apprehensions of of putting putting on on anything anything that that might might impair impair my my severely severely practical practical character character in in the the eyes eyes of of the the misses misses spenlow. spenlow. i i endeavoured endeavoured to to hit hit a a happy happy medium medium between between these these two two extremes; extremes; my my aunt aunt approved approved the the result; result; and and mr. mr. dick dick threw threw one one of of his his shoes shoes after after traddles traddles and and me, me, for for luck, luck, as as we we went went downstairs. downstairs. excellent excellent fellow fellow as as i i knew knew traddles traddles to to be, be, and and warmly warmly attached attached to to him him as as i i was, was, i i could could not not help help wishing, wishing, on on that that delicate delicate occasion, occasion, that that he he had had never never contracted contracted the the habit habit of of brushing brushing his his hair hair so so very very upright. upright. it it gave gave him him a a surprised surprised look look -- -- not not to to say say a a hearth-broomy hearth-broomy kind kind of of expression expression -- -- which, which, my my apprehensions apprehensions whispered, whispered, might might be be fatal fatal to to us. us. i i took took the the liberty liberty of of mentioning mentioning it it to to traddles, traddles, as as we we were were walking walking to to putney; putney; and and saying saying that that if if he he would would smooth smooth it it down down a a little little -- -- 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, lifting lifting off off his his hat, hat, and and rubbing rubbing his his hair hair all all kinds kinds of of ways, ways, 'nothing 'nothing would would give give me me greater greater pleasure. pleasure. but but it it won't.' won't.' 'won't 'won't be be smoothed smoothed down?' down?' said said i. i. 'no,' 'no,' said said traddles. traddles. 'nothing 'nothing will will induce induce it. it. if if i i was was to to carry carry a a half-hundred-weight half-hundred-weight upon upon it, it, all all the the way way to to putney, putney, it it would would be be up up again again the the moment moment the the weight weight was was taken taken off. off. you have have no no idea idea what what obstinate obstinate hair hair mine mine is, is, copperfield. copperfield. i i am am quite quite a a fretful fretful porcupine.' porcupine.' i i was was a a little little disappointed, disappointed, i i must must confess, confess, but but thoroughly thoroughly charmed charmed by by his his good-nature good-nature too. too. i i told told him him how how i i esteemed esteemed his his good-nature; good-nature; and and said said that that his his hair hair must must have have taken taken all all the the obstinacy obstinacy out out of of his his character, character, for for he he had had none. none. 'oh!' 'oh!' returned returned traddles, traddles, laughing. laughing. 'i 'i assure assure you, it's it's quite quite an an old old story, story, my my unfortunate unfortunate hair. hair. my my uncle's uncle's wife wife couldn't couldn't bear bear it. it. she she said said it it exasperated exasperated her. her. it it stood stood very very much much in in my my way, way, too, too, when when i i first first fell fell in in love love with with sophy. sophy. very very much!' much!' 'did 'did she she object object to to it?' it?' 'she 'she didn't,' didn't,' rejoined rejoined traddles; traddles; 'but 'but her her eldest eldest sister sister -- -- the the one one that's that's the the beauty beauty -- -- quite quite made made game game of of it, it, i i understand. understand. in in fact, fact, all all the the sisters sisters laugh laugh at at it.' it.' 'agreeable!' 'agreeable!' said said i. i. 'yes,' 'yes,' returned returned traddles traddles with with perfect perfect innocence, innocence, 'it's 'it's a a joke joke for for us. us. they they pretend pretend that that sophy sophy has has a a lock lock of of it it in in her her desk, desk, and and is is obliged obliged to to shut shut it it in in a a clasped clasped book, book, to to keep keep it it down. down. we we laugh laugh about about it.' it.' 'by 'by the the by, by, my my dear dear traddles,' traddles,' said said i, i, 'your 'your experience experience may may suggest suggest something something to to me. me. when when you became became engaged engaged to to the the young young lady lady whom whom you have have just just mentioned, mentioned, did did you make make a a regular regular proposal proposal to to her her family? family? was was there there anything anything like like -- -- what what we we are are going going through through today, today, for for instance?' instance?' i i added, added, nervously. nervously. 'why,' 'why,' replied replied traddles, traddles, on on whose whose attentive attentive face face a a thoughtful thoughtful shade shade had had stolen, stolen, 'it 'it was was rather rather a a painful painful transaction, transaction, copperfield, copperfield, in in my my case. case. you see, see, sophy sophy being being of of so so much much use use in in the the family, family, none none of of them them could could endure endure the the thought thought of of her her ever ever being being married. married. indeed, indeed, they they had had quite quite settled settled among among themselves themselves that that she she never never was was to to be be married, married, and and they they called called her her the the old old maid. maid. accordingly, accordingly, when when i i mentioned mentioned it, it, with with the the greatest greatest precaution, precaution, to to mrs. mrs. crewler crewler -- -- ' ' 'the 'the mama?' mama?' said said i. i. 'the 'the mama,' mama,' said said traddles traddles -- -- 'reverend 'reverend horace horace crewler crewler -- -- when when i i mentioned mentioned it it with with every every possible possible precaution precaution to to mrs. mrs. crewler, crewler, the the effect effect upon upon her her was was such such that that she she gave gave a a scream scream and and became became insensible. insensible. i i couldn't couldn't approach approach the the subject subject again, again, for for months.' months.' 'you did did at at last?' last?' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, the the reverend reverend horace horace did,' did,' said said traddles. traddles. 'he 'he is is an an excellent excellent man, man, most most exemplary exemplary in in every every way; way; and and he he pointed pointed out out to to her her that that she she ought, ought, as as a a christian, christian, to to reconcile reconcile herself herself to to the the sacrifice sacrifice (especially (especially as as it it was was so so uncertain), uncertain), and and to to bear bear no no uncharitable uncharitable feeling feeling towards towards me. me. as as to to myself, myself, copperfield, copperfield, i i give give you my my word, word, i i felt felt a a perfect perfect bird bird of of prey prey towards towards the the family.' family.' 'the 'the sisters sisters took took your your part, part, i i hope, hope, traddles?' traddles?' 'why, 'why, i i can't can't say say they they did,' did,' he he returned. returned. 'when 'when we we had had comparatively comparatively reconciled reconciled mrs. mrs. crewler crewler to to it, it, we we had had to to break break it it to to sarah. sarah. you recollect recollect my my mentioning mentioning sarah, sarah, as as the the one one that that has has something something the the matter matter with with her her spine?' spine?' 'perfectly!' 'perfectly!' 'she 'she clenched clenched both both her her hands,' hands,' said said traddles, traddles, looking looking at at me me in in dismay; dismay; 'shut 'shut her her eyes; eyes; turned turned lead-colour; lead-colour; became became perfectly perfectly stiff; stiff; and and took took nothing nothing for for two two days days but but toast-and-water, toast-and-water, administered administered with with a a tea-spoon.' tea-spoon.' 'what 'what a a very very unpleasant unpleasant girl, girl, traddles!' traddles!' i i remarked. remarked. 'oh, 'oh, i i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, copperfield!' copperfield!' said said traddles. traddles. 'she 'she is is a a very very charming charming girl, girl, but but she she has has a a great great deal deal of of feeling. feeling. in in fact, fact, they they all all have. have. sophy sophy told told me me afterwards, afterwards, that that the the self-reproach self-reproach she she underwent underwent while while she she was was in in attendance attendance upon upon sarah, sarah, no no words words could could describe. describe. i i know know it it must must have have been been severe, severe, by by my my own own feelings, feelings, copperfield; copperfield; which which were were like like a a criminal's. criminal's. after after sarah sarah was was restored, restored, we we still still had had to to break break it it to to the the other other eight; eight; and and it it produced produced various various effects effects upon upon them them of of a a most most pathetic pathetic nature. nature. the the two two little little ones, ones, whom whom sophy sophy educates, educates, have have only only just just left left off off de-testing de-testing me.' me.' 'at 'at any any rate, rate, they they are are all all reconciled reconciled to to it it now, now, i i hope?' hope?' said said i. i. 'ye-yes, 'ye-yes, i i should should say say they they were, were, on on the the whole, whole, resigned resigned to to it,' it,' said said traddles, traddles, doubtfully. doubtfully. 'the 'the fact fact is, is, we we avoid avoid mentioning mentioning the the subject; subject; and and my my unsettled unsettled prospects prospects and and indifferent indifferent circumstances circumstances are are a a great great consolation consolation to to them. them. there there will will be be a a deplorable deplorable scene, scene, whenever whenever we we are are married. married. it it will will be be much much more more like like a a funeral, funeral, than than a a wedding. wedding. and and they'll they'll all all hate hate me me for for taking taking her her away!' away!' his his honest honest face, face, as as he he looked looked at at me me with with a a serio-comic serio-comic shake shake of of his his head, head, impresses impresses me me more more in in the the remembrance remembrance than than it it did did in in the the reality, reality, for for i i was was by by this this time time in in a a state state of of such such excessive excessive trepidation trepidation and and wandering wandering of of mind, mind, as as to to be be quite quite unable unable to to fix fix my my attention attention on on anything. anything. on on our our approaching approaching the the house house where where the the misses misses spenlow spenlow lived, lived, i i was was at at such such a a discount discount in in respect respect of of my my personal personal looks looks and and presence presence of of mind, mind, that that traddles traddles proposed proposed a a gentle gentle stimulant stimulant in in the the form form of of a a glass glass of of ale. ale. this this having having been been administered administered at at a a neighbouring neighbouring public-house, public-house, he he conducted conducted me, me, with with tottering tottering steps, steps, to to the the misses misses spenlow's spenlow's door. door. i i had had a a vague vague sensation sensation of of being, being, as as it it were, were, on on view, view, when when the the maid maid opened opened it; it; and and of of wavering, wavering, somehow, somehow, across across a a hall hall with with a a weather-glass weather-glass in in it, it, into into a a quiet quiet little little drawing-room drawing-room on on the the ground-floor, ground-floor, commanding commanding a a neat neat garden. garden. also also of of sitting sitting down down here, here, on on a a sofa, sofa, and and seeing seeing traddles's traddles's hair hair start start up, up, now now his his hat hat was was removed, removed, like like one one of of those those obtrusive obtrusive little little figures figures made made of of springs, springs, that that fly fly out out of of fictitious fictitious snuff-boxes snuff-boxes when when the the lid lid is is taken taken off. off. also also of of hearing hearing an an old-fashioned old-fashioned clock clock ticking ticking away away on on the the chimney-piece, chimney-piece, and and trying trying to to make make it it keep keep time time to to the the jerking jerking of of my my heart, heart, -- -- which which it it wouldn't. wouldn't. also also of of looking looking round round the the room room for for any any sign sign of of dora, dora, and and seeing seeing none. none. also also of of thinking thinking that that jip jip once once barked barked in in the the distance, distance, and and was was instantly instantly choked choked by by somebody. somebody. ultimately ultimately i i found found myself myself backing backing traddles traddles into into the the fireplace, fireplace, and and bowing bowing in in great great confusion confusion to to two two dry dry little little elderly elderly ladies, ladies, dressed dressed in in black, black, and and each each looking looking wonderfully wonderfully like like a a preparation preparation in in chip chip or or tan tan of of the the late late mr. mr. spenlow. spenlow. 'pray,' 'pray,' said said one one of of the the two two little little ladies, ladies, 'be 'be seated.' seated.' when when i i had had done done tumbling tumbling over over traddles, traddles, and and had had sat sat upon upon something something which which was was not not a a cat cat -- -- my my first first seat seat was was -- -- i i so so far far recovered recovered my my sight, sight, as as to to perceive perceive that that mr. mr. spenlow spenlow had had evidently evidently been been the the youngest youngest of of the the family; family; that that there there was was a a disparity disparity of of six six or or eight eight years years between between the the two two sisters; sisters; and and that that the the younger younger appeared appeared to to be be the the manager manager of of the the conference, conference, inasmuch inasmuch as as she she had had my my letter letter in in her her hand hand -- -- so so familiar familiar as as it it looked looked to to me, me, and and yet yet so so odd! odd! -- -- and and was was referring referring to to it it through through an an eye-glass. eye-glass. they they were were dressed dressed alike, alike, but but this this sister sister wore wore her her dress dress with with a a more more youthful youthful air air than than the the other; other; and and perhaps perhaps had had a a trifle trifle more more frill, frill, or or tucker, tucker, or or brooch, brooch, or or bracelet, bracelet, or or some some little little thing thing of of that that kind, kind, which which made made her her look look more more lively. lively. they they were were both both upright upright in in their their carriage, carriage, formal, formal, precise, precise, composed, composed, and and quiet. quiet. the the sister sister who who had had not not my my letter, letter, had had her her arms arms crossed crossed on on her her breast, breast, and and resting resting on on each each other, other, like like an an idol. idol. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i believe,' believe,' said said the the sister sister who who had had got got my my letter, letter, addressing addressing herself herself to to traddles. traddles. this this was was a a frightful frightful beginning. beginning. traddles traddles had had to to indicate indicate that that i i was was mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and i i had had to to lay lay claim claim to to myself, myself, and and they they had had to to divest divest themselves themselves of of a a preconceived preconceived opinion opinion that that traddles traddles was was mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and altogether altogether we we were were in in a a nice nice condition. condition. to to improve improve it, it, we we all all distinctly distinctly heard heard jip jip give give two two short short barks, barks, and and receive receive another another choke. choke. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield!' copperfield!' said said the the sister sister with with the the letter. letter. i i did did something something -- -- bowed, bowed, i i suppose suppose -- -- and and was was all all attention, attention, when when the the other other sister sister struck struck in. in. 'my 'my sister sister lavinia,' lavinia,' said said she she 'being 'being conversant conversant with with matters matters of of this this nature, nature, will will state state what what we we consider consider most most calculated calculated to to promote promote the the happiness happiness of of both both parties.' parties.' i i discovered discovered afterwards afterwards that that miss miss lavinia lavinia was was an an authority authority in in affairs affairs of of the the heart, heart, by by reason reason of of there there having having anciently anciently existed existed a a certain certain mr. mr. pidger, pidger, who who played played short short whist, whist, and and was was supposed supposed to to have have been been enamoured enamoured of of her. her. my my private private opinion opinion is, is, that that this this was was entirely entirely a a gratuitous gratuitous assumption, assumption, and and that that pidger pidger was was altogether altogether innocent innocent of of any any such such sentiments sentiments -- -- to to which which he he had had never never given given any any sort sort of of expression expression that that i i could could ever ever hear hear of. of. both both miss miss lavinia lavinia and and miss miss clarissa clarissa had had a a superstition, superstition, however, however, that that he he would would have have declared declared his his passion, passion, if if he he had had not not been been cut cut short short in in his his youth youth (at (at about about sixty) sixty) by by over-drinking over-drinking his his constitution, constitution, and and over-doing over-doing an an attempt attempt to to set set it it right right again again by by swilling swilling bath bath water. water. they they had had a a lurking lurking suspicion suspicion even, even, that that he he died died of of secret secret love; love; though though i i must must say say there there was was a a picture picture of of him him in in the the house house with with a a damask damask nose, nose, which which concealment concealment did did not not appear appear to to have have ever ever preyed preyed upon. upon. 'we 'we will will not,' not,' said said miss miss lavinia, lavinia, 'enter 'enter on on the the past past history history of of this this matter. matter. our our poor poor brother brother francis's francis's death death has has cancelled cancelled that.' that.' 'we 'we had had not,' not,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'been 'been in in the the habit habit of of frequent frequent association association with with our our brother brother francis; francis; but but there there was was no no decided decided division division or or disunion disunion between between us. us. francis francis took took his his road; road; we we took took ours. ours. we we considered considered it it conducive conducive to to the the happiness happiness of of all all parties parties that that it it should should be be so. so. and and it it was was so.' so.' each each of of the the sisters sisters leaned leaned a a little little forward forward to to speak, speak, shook shook her her head head after after speaking, speaking, and and became became upright upright again again when when silent. silent. miss miss clarissa clarissa never never moved moved her her arms. arms. she she sometimes sometimes played played tunes tunes upon upon them them with with her her fingers fingers -- -- minuets minuets and and marches marches i i should should think think -- -- but but never never moved moved them. them. 'our 'our niece's niece's position, position, or or supposed supposed position, position, is is much much changed changed by by our our brother brother francis's francis's death,' death,' said said miss miss lavinia; lavinia; 'and 'and therefore therefore we we consider consider our our brother's brother's opinions opinions as as regarded regarded her her position position as as being being changed changed too. too. we we have have no no reason reason to to doubt, doubt, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that you are are a a young young gentleman gentleman possessed possessed of of good good qualities qualities and and honourable honourable character; character; or or that that you have have an an affection affection -- -- or or are are fully fully persuaded persuaded that that you have have an an affection affection -- -- for for our our niece.' niece.' i i replied, replied, as as i i usually usually did did whenever whenever i i had had a a chance, chance, that that nobody nobody had had ever ever loved loved anybody anybody else else as as i i loved loved dora. dora. traddles traddles came came to to my my assistance assistance with with a a confirmatory confirmatory murmur. murmur. miss miss lavinia lavinia was was going going on on to to make make some some rejoinder, rejoinder, when when miss miss clarissa, clarissa, who who appeared appeared to to be be incessantly incessantly beset beset by by a a desire desire to to refer refer to to her her brother brother francis, francis, struck struck in in again: again: 'if 'if dora's dora's mama,' mama,' she she said, said, 'when 'when she she married married our our brother brother francis, francis, had had at at once once said said that that there there was was not not room room for for the the family family at at the the dinner-table, dinner-table, it it would would have have been been better better for for the the happiness happiness of of all all parties.' parties.' 'sister 'sister clarissa,' clarissa,' said said miss miss lavinia. lavinia. 'perhaps 'perhaps we we needn't needn't mind mind that that now.' now.' 'sister 'sister lavinia,' lavinia,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'it 'it belongs belongs to to the the subject. subject. with with your your branch branch of of the the subject, subject, on on which which alone alone you are are competent competent to to speak, speak, i i should should not not think think of of interfering. interfering. on on this this branch branch of of the the subject subject i i have have a a voice voice and and an an opinion. opinion. it it would would have have been been better better for for the the happiness happiness of of all all parties, parties, if if dora's dora's mama, mama, when when she she married married our our brother brother francis, francis, had had mentioned mentioned plainly plainly what what her her intentions intentions were. were. we we should should then then have have known known what what we we had had to to expect. expect. we we should should have have said said "pray "pray do do not not invite invite us, us, at at any any time"; time"; and and all all possibility possibility of of misunderstanding misunderstanding would would have have been been avoided.' avoided.' when when miss miss clarissa clarissa had had shaken shaken her her head, head, miss miss lavinia lavinia resumed: resumed: again again referring referring to to my my letter letter through through her her eye-glass. eye-glass. they they both both had had little little bright bright round round twinkling twinkling eyes, eyes, by by the the way, way, which which were were like like birds' birds' eyes. eyes. they they were were not not unlike unlike birds, birds, altogether; altogether; having having a a sharp, sharp, brisk, brisk, sudden sudden manner, manner, and and a a little little short, short, spruce spruce way way of of adjusting adjusting themselves, themselves, like like canaries. canaries. miss miss lavinia, lavinia, as as i i have have said, said, resumed: resumed: 'you ask ask permission permission of of my my sister sister clarissa clarissa and and myself, myself, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, to to visit visit here, here, as as the the accepted accepted suitor suitor of of our our niece.' niece.' 'if 'if our our brother brother francis,' francis,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, breaking breaking out out again, again, if if i i may may call call anything anything so so calm calm a a breaking breaking out, out, 'wished 'wished to to surround surround himself himself with with an an atmosphere atmosphere of of doctors' doctors' commons, commons, and and of of doctors' doctors' commons commons only, only, what what right right or or desire desire had had we we to to object? object? none, none, i i am am sure. sure. we we have have ever ever been been far far from from wishing wishing to to obtrude obtrude ourselves ourselves on on anyone. anyone. but but why why not not say say so? so? let let our our brother brother francis francis and and his his wife wife have have their their society. society. let let my my sister sister lavinia lavinia and and myself myself have have our our society. society. we we can can find find it it for for ourselves, ourselves, i i hope.' hope.' as as this this appeared appeared to to be be addressed addressed to to traddles traddles and and me, me, both both traddles traddles and and i i made made some some sort sort of of reply. reply. traddles traddles was was inaudible. inaudible. i i think think i i observed, observed, myself, myself, that that it it was was highly highly creditable creditable to to all all concerned. concerned. i i don't don't in in the the least least know know what what i i meant. meant. 'sister 'sister lavinia,' lavinia,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, having having now now relieved relieved her her mind, mind, 'you can can go go on, on, my my dear.' dear.' miss miss lavinia lavinia proceeded: proceeded: 'mr. 'mr. copperfield, copperfield, my my sister sister clarissa clarissa and and i i have have been been very very careful careful indeed indeed in in considering considering this this letter; letter; and and we we have have not not considered considered it it without without finally finally showing showing it it to to our our niece, niece, and and discussing discussing it it with with our our niece. niece. we we have have no no doubt doubt that that you think think you like like her her very very much.' much.' 'think, 'think, ma'am,' ma'am,' i i rapturously rapturously began, began, 'oh! 'oh! -- -- ' ' but but miss miss clarissa clarissa giving giving me me a a look look (just (just like like a a sharp sharp canary), canary), as as requesting requesting that that i i would would not not interrupt interrupt the the oracle, oracle, i i begged begged pardon. pardon. 'affection,' 'affection,' said said miss miss lavinia, lavinia, glancing glancing at at her her sister sister for for corroboration, corroboration, which which she she gave gave in in the the form form of of a a little little nod nod to to every every clause, clause, 'mature 'mature affection, affection, homage, homage, devotion, devotion, does does not not easily easily express express itself. itself. its its voice voice is is low. low. it it is is modest modest and and retiring, retiring, it it lies lies in in ambush, ambush, waits waits and and waits. waits. such such is is the the mature mature fruit. fruit. sometimes sometimes a a life life glides glides away, away, and and finds finds it it still still ripening ripening in in the the shade.' shade.' of of course course i i did did not not understand understand then then that that this this was was an an allusion allusion to to her her supposed supposed experience experience of of the the stricken stricken pidger; pidger; but but i i saw, saw, from from the the gravity gravity with with which which miss miss clarissa clarissa nodded nodded her her head, head, that that great great weight weight was was attached attached to to these these words. words. 'the 'the light light -- -- for for i i call call them, them, in in comparison comparison with with such such sentiments, sentiments, the the light light -- -- inclinations inclinations of of very very young young people,' people,' pursued pursued miss miss lavinia, lavinia, 'are 'are dust, dust, compared compared to to rocks. rocks. it it is is owing owing to to the the difficulty difficulty of of knowing knowing whether whether they they are are likely likely to to endure endure or or have have any any real real foundation, foundation, that that my my sister sister clarissa clarissa and and myself myself have have been been very very undecided undecided how how to to act, act, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and mr. mr. -- -- ' ' 'traddles,' 'traddles,' said said my my friend, friend, finding finding himself himself looked looked at. at. 'i 'i beg beg pardon. pardon. of of the the inner inner temple, temple, i i believe?' believe?' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, again again glancing glancing at at my my letter. letter. traddles traddles said said 'exactly 'exactly so,' so,' and and became became pretty pretty red red in in the the face. face. now, now, although although i i had had not not received received any any express express encouragement encouragement as as yet, yet, i i fancied fancied that that i i saw saw in in the the two two little little sisters, sisters, and and particularly particularly in in miss miss lavinia, lavinia, an an intensified intensified enjoyment enjoyment of of this this new new and and fruitful fruitful subject subject of of domestic domestic interest, interest, a a settling settling down down to to make make the the most most of of it, it, a a disposition disposition to to pet pet it, it, in in which which there there was was a a good good bright bright ray ray of of hope. hope. i i thought thought i i perceived perceived that that miss miss lavinia lavinia would would have have uncommon uncommon satisfaction satisfaction in in superintending superintending two two young young lovers, lovers, like like dora dora and and me; me; and and that that miss miss clarissa clarissa would would have have hardly hardly less less satisfaction satisfaction in in seeing seeing her her superintend superintend us, us, and and in in chiming chiming in in with with her her own own particular particular department department of of the the subject subject whenever whenever that that impulse impulse was was strong strong upon upon her. her. this this gave gave me me courage courage to to protest protest most most vehemently vehemently that that i i loved loved dora dora better better than than i i could could tell, tell, or or anyone anyone believe; believe; that that all all my my friends friends knew knew how how i i loved loved her; her; that that my my aunt, aunt, agnes, agnes, traddles, traddles, everyone everyone who who knew knew me, me, knew knew how how i i loved loved her, her, and and how how earnest earnest my my love love had had made made me. me. for for the the truth truth of of this, this, i i appealed appealed to to traddles. traddles. and and traddles, traddles, firing firing up up as as if if he he were were plunging plunging into into a a parliamentary parliamentary debate, debate, really really did did come come out out nobly: nobly: confirming confirming me me in in good good round round terms, terms, and and in in a a plain plain sensible sensible practical practical manner, manner, that that evidently evidently made made a a favourable favourable impression. impression. 'i 'i speak, speak, if if i i may may presume presume to to say say so, so, as as one one who who has has some some little little experience experience of of such such things,' things,' said said traddles, traddles, 'being 'being myself myself engaged engaged to to a a young young lady lady -- -- one one of of ten, ten, down down in in devonshire devonshire -- -- and and seeing seeing no no probability, probability, at at present, present, of of our our engagement engagement coming coming to to a a termination.' termination.' 'you may may be be able able to to confirm confirm what what i i have have said, said, mr. mr. traddles,' traddles,' observed observed miss miss lavinia, lavinia, evidently evidently taking taking a a new new interest interest in in him, him, 'of 'of the the affection affection that that is is modest modest and and retiring; retiring; that that waits waits and and waits?' waits?' 'entirely, 'entirely, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said traddles. traddles. miss miss clarissa clarissa looked looked at at miss miss lavinia, lavinia, and and shook shook her her head head gravely. gravely. miss miss lavinia lavinia looked looked consciously consciously at at miss miss clarissa, clarissa, and and heaved heaved a a little little sigh. sigh. 'sister 'sister lavinia,' lavinia,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'take 'take my my smelling-bottle.' smelling-bottle.' miss miss lavinia lavinia revived revived herself herself with with a a few few whiffs whiffs of of aromatic aromatic vinegar vinegar -- -- traddles traddles and and i i looking looking on on with with great great solicitude solicitude the the while; while; and and then then went went on on to to say, say, rather rather faintly: faintly: 'my 'my sister sister and and myself myself have have been been in in great great doubt, doubt, mr. mr. traddles, traddles, what what course course we we ought ought to to take take in in reference reference to to the the likings, likings, or or imaginary imaginary likings, likings, of of such such very very young young people people as as your your friend friend mr. mr. copperfield copperfield and and our our niece.' niece.' 'our 'our brother brother francis's francis's child,' child,' remarked remarked miss miss clarissa. clarissa. 'if 'if our our brother brother francis's francis's wife wife had had found found it it convenient convenient in in her her lifetime lifetime (though (though she she had had an an unquestionable unquestionable right right to to act act as as she she thought thought best) best) to to invite invite the the family family to to her her dinner-table, dinner-table, we we might might have have known known our our brother brother francis's francis's child child better better at at the the present present moment. moment. sister sister lavinia, lavinia, proceed.' proceed.' miss miss lavinia lavinia turned turned my my letter, letter, so so as as to to bring bring the the superscription superscription towards towards herself, herself, and and referred referred through through her her eye-glass eye-glass to to some some orderly-looking orderly-looking notes notes she she had had made made on on that that part part of of it. it. 'it 'it seems seems to to us,' us,' said said she, she, 'prudent, 'prudent, mr. mr. traddles, traddles, to to bring bring these these feelings feelings to to the the test test of of our our own own observation. observation. at at present present we we know know nothing nothing of of them, them, and and are are not not in in a a situation situation to to judge judge how how much much reality reality there there may may be be in in them. them. therefore therefore we we are are inclined inclined so so far far to to accede accede to to mr. mr. copperfield's copperfield's proposal, proposal, as as to to admit admit his his visits visits here.' here.' 'i 'i shall shall never, never, dear dear ladies,' ladies,' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, relieved relieved of of an an immense immense load load of of apprehension, apprehension, 'forget 'forget your your kindness!' kindness!' 'but,' 'but,' pursued pursued miss miss lavinia, lavinia, -- -- 'but, 'but, we we would would prefer prefer to to regard regard those those visits, visits, mr. mr. traddles, traddles, as as made, made, at at present, present, to to us. us. we we must must guard guard ourselves ourselves from from recognizing recognizing any any positive positive engagement engagement between between mr. mr. copperfield copperfield and and our our niece, niece, until until we we have have had had an an opportunity opportunity -- -- ' ' 'until 'until you have have had had an an opportunity, opportunity, sister sister lavinia,' lavinia,' said said miss miss clarissa. clarissa. 'be 'be it it so,' so,' assented assented miss miss lavinia, lavinia, with with a a sigh sigh -- -- 'until 'until i i have have had had an an opportunity opportunity of of observing observing them.' them.' 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, turning turning to to me, me, 'you feel, feel, i i am am sure, sure, that that nothing nothing could could be be more more reasonable reasonable or or considerate.' considerate.' 'nothing!' 'nothing!' cried cried i. i. 'i 'i am am deeply deeply sensible sensible of of it.' it.' 'in 'in this this position position of of affairs,' affairs,' said said miss miss lavinia, lavinia, again again referring referring to to her her notes, notes, 'and 'and admitting admitting his his visits visits on on this this understanding understanding only, only, we we must must require require from from mr. mr. copperfield copperfield a a distinct distinct assurance, assurance, on on his his word word of of honour, honour, that that no no communication communication of of any any kind kind shall shall take take place place between between him him and and our our niece niece without without our our knowledge. knowledge. that that no no project project whatever whatever shall shall be be entertained entertained with with regard regard to to our our niece, niece, without without being being first first submitted submitted to to us us -- -- ' ' 'to 'to you, sister sister lavinia,' lavinia,' miss miss clarissa clarissa interposed. interposed. 'be 'be it it so, so, clarissa!' clarissa!' assented assented miss miss lavinia lavinia resignedly resignedly -- -- 'to 'to me me -- -- and and receiving receiving our our concurrence. concurrence. we we must must make make this this a a most most express express and and serious serious stipulation, stipulation, not not to to be be broken broken on on any any account. account. we we wished wished mr. mr. copperfield copperfield to to be be accompanied accompanied by by some some confidential confidential friend friend today,' today,' with with an an inclination inclination of of her her head head towards towards traddles, traddles, who who bowed, bowed, 'in 'in order order that that there there might might be be no no doubt doubt or or misconception misconception on on this this subject. subject. if if mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, or or if if you, mr. mr. traddles, traddles, feel feel the the least least scruple, scruple, in in giving giving this this promise, promise, i i beg beg you to to take take time time to to consider consider it.' it.' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, in in a a state state of of high high ecstatic ecstatic fervour, fervour, that that not not a a moment's moment's consideration consideration could could be be necessary. necessary. i i bound bound myself myself by by the the required required promise, promise, in in a a most most impassioned impassioned manner; manner; called called upon upon traddles traddles to to witness witness it; it; and and denounced denounced myself myself as as the the most most atrocious atrocious of of characters characters if if i i ever ever swerved swerved from from it it in in the the least least degree. degree. 'stay!' 'stay!' said said miss miss lavinia, lavinia, holding holding up up her her hand; hand; 'we 'we resolved, resolved, before before we we had had the the pleasure pleasure of of receiving receiving you two two gentlemen, gentlemen, to to leave leave you alone alone for for a a quarter quarter of of an an hour, hour, to to consider consider this this point. point. you will will allow allow us us to to retire.' retire.' it it was was in in vain vain for for me me to to say say that that no no consideration consideration was was necessary. necessary. they they persisted persisted in in withdrawing withdrawing for for the the specified specified time. time. accordingly, accordingly, these these little little birds birds hopped hopped out out with with great great dignity; dignity; leaving leaving me me to to receive receive the the congratulations congratulations of of traddles, traddles, and and to to feel feel as as if if i i were were translated translated to to regions regions of of exquisite exquisite happiness. happiness. exactly exactly at at the the expiration expiration of of the the quarter quarter of of an an hour, hour, they they reappeared reappeared with with no no less less dignity dignity than than they they had had disappeared. disappeared. they they had had gone gone rustling rustling away away as as if if their their little little dresses dresses were were made made of of autumn-leaves: autumn-leaves: and and they they came came rustling rustling back, back, in in like like manner. manner. i i then then bound bound myself myself once once more more to to the the prescribed prescribed conditions. conditions. 'sister 'sister clarissa,' clarissa,' said said miss miss lavinia, lavinia, 'the 'the rest rest is is with with you.' miss miss clarissa, clarissa, unfolding unfolding her her arms arms for for the the first first time, time, took took the the notes notes and and glanced glanced at at them. them. 'we 'we shall shall be be happy,' happy,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'to 'to see see mr. mr. copperfield copperfield to to dinner, dinner, every every sunday, sunday, if if it it should should suit suit his his convenience. convenience. our our hour hour is is three.' three.' i i bowed. bowed. 'in 'in the the course course of of the the week,' week,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'we 'we shall shall be be happy happy to to see see mr. mr. copperfield copperfield to to tea. tea. our our hour hour is is half-past half-past six.' six.' i i bowed bowed again. again. 'twice 'twice in in the the week,' week,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'but, 'but, as as a a rule, rule, not not oftener.' oftener.' i i bowed bowed again. again. 'miss 'miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said miss miss clarissa, clarissa, 'mentioned 'mentioned in in mr. mr. copperfield's copperfield's letter, letter, will will perhaps perhaps call call upon upon us. us. when when visiting visiting is is better better for for the the happiness happiness of of all all parties, parties, we we are are glad glad to to receive receive visits, visits, and and return return them. them. when when it it is is better better for for the the happiness happiness of of all all parties parties that that no no visiting visiting should should take take place, place, (as (as in in the the case case of of our our brother brother francis, francis, and and his his establishment) establishment) that that is is quite quite different.' different.' i i intimated intimated that that my my aunt aunt would would be be proud proud and and delighted delighted to to make make their their acquaintance; acquaintance; though though i i must must say say i i was was not not quite quite sure sure of of their their getting getting on on very very satisfactorily satisfactorily together. together. the the conditions conditions being being now now closed, closed, i i expressed expressed my my acknowledgements acknowledgements in in the the warmest warmest manner; manner; and, and, taking taking the the hand, hand, first first of of miss miss clarissa, clarissa, and and then then of of miss miss lavinia, lavinia, pressed pressed it, it, in in each each case, case, to to my my lips. lips. miss miss lavinia lavinia then then arose, arose, and and begging begging mr. mr. traddles traddles to to excuse excuse us us for for a a minute, minute, requested requested me me to to follow follow her. her. i i obeyed, obeyed, all all in in a a tremble, tremble, and and was was conducted conducted into into another another room. room. there there i i found found my my blessed blessed darling darling stopping stopping her her ears ears behind behind the the door, door, with with her her dear dear little little face face against against the the wall; wall; and and jip jip in in the the plate-warmer plate-warmer with with his his head head tied tied up up in in a a towel. towel. oh! oh! how how beautiful beautiful she she was was in in her her black black frock, frock, and and how how she she sobbed sobbed and and cried cried at at first, first, and and wouldn't wouldn't come come out out from from behind behind the the door! door! how how fond fond we we were were of of one one another, another, when when she she did did come come out out at at last; last; and and what what a a state state of of bliss bliss i i was was in, in, when when we we took took jip jip out out of of the the plate-warmer, plate-warmer, and and restored restored him him to to the the light, light, sneezing sneezing very very much, much, and and were were all all three three reunited! reunited! 'my 'my dearest dearest dora! dora! now, now, indeed, indeed, my my own own for for ever!' ever!' 'oh, 'oh, don't!' don't!' pleaded pleaded dora. dora. 'please!' 'please!' 'are 'are you not not my my own own for for ever, ever, dora?' dora?' 'oh 'oh yes, yes, of of course course i i am!' am!' cried cried dora, dora, 'but 'but i i am am so so frightened!' frightened!' 'frightened, 'frightened, my my own?' own?' 'oh 'oh yes! yes! i i don't don't like like him,' him,' said said dora. dora. 'why 'why don't don't he he go?' go?' 'who, 'who, my my life?' life?' 'your 'your friend,' friend,' said said dora. dora. 'it 'it isn't isn't any any business business of of his. his. what what a a stupid stupid he he must must be!' be!' 'my 'my love!' love!' (there (there never never was was anything anything so so coaxing coaxing as as her her childish childish ways.) ways.) 'he 'he is is the the best best creature!' creature!' 'oh, 'oh, but but we we don't don't want want any any best best creatures!' creatures!' pouted pouted dora. dora. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' i i argued, argued, 'you will will soon soon know know him him well, well, and and like like him him of of all all things. things. and and here here is is my my aunt aunt coming coming soon; soon; and and you'll you'll like like her her of of all all things things too, too, when when you know know her.' her.' 'no, 'no, please please don't don't bring bring her!' her!' said said dora, dora, giving giving me me a a horrified horrified little little kiss, kiss, and and folding folding her her hands. hands. 'don't. 'don't. i i know know she's she's a a naughty, naughty, mischief-making mischief-making old old thing! thing! don't don't let let her her come come here, here, doady!' doady!' which which was was a a corruption corruption of of david. david. remonstrance remonstrance was was of of no no use, use, then; then; so so i i laughed, laughed, and and admired, admired, and and was was very very much much in in love love and and very very happy; happy; and and she she showed showed me me jip's jip's new new trick trick of of standing standing on on his his hind hind legs legs in in a a corner corner -- -- which which he he did did for for about about the the space space of of a a flash flash of of lightning, lightning, and and then then fell fell down down -- -- and and i i don't don't know know how how long long i i should should have have stayed stayed there, there, oblivious oblivious of of traddles, traddles, if if miss miss lavinia lavinia had had not not come come in in to to take take me me away. away. miss miss lavinia lavinia was was very very fond fond of of dora dora (she (she told told me me dora dora was was exactly exactly like like what what she she had had been been herself herself at at her her age age -- -- she she must must have have altered altered a a good good deal), deal), and and she she treated treated dora dora just just as as if if she she had had been been a a toy. toy. i i wanted wanted to to persuade persuade dora dora to to come come and and see see traddles, traddles, but but on on my my proposing proposing it it she she ran ran off off to to her her own own room room and and locked locked herself herself in; in; so so i i went went to to traddles traddles without without her, her, and and walked walked away away with with him him on on air. air. 'nothing 'nothing could could be be more more satisfactory,' satisfactory,' said said traddles; traddles; 'and 'and they they are are very very agreeable agreeable old old ladies, ladies, i i am am sure. sure. i i shouldn't shouldn't be be at at all all surprised surprised if if you were were to to be be married married years years before before me, me, copperfield.' copperfield.' 'does 'does your your sophy sophy play play on on any any instrument, instrument, traddles?' traddles?' i i inquired, inquired, in in the the pride pride of of my my heart. heart. 'she 'she knows knows enough enough of of the the piano piano to to teach teach it it to to her her little little sisters,' sisters,' said said traddles. traddles. 'does 'does she she sing sing at at all?' all?' i i asked. asked. 'why, 'why, she she sings sings ballads, ballads, sometimes, sometimes, to to freshen freshen up up the the others others a a little little when when they're they're out out of of spirits,' spirits,' said said traddles. traddles. 'nothing 'nothing scientific.' scientific.' 'she 'she doesn't doesn't sing sing to to the the guitar?' guitar?' said said i. i. 'oh 'oh dear dear no!' no!' said said traddles. traddles. 'paint 'paint at at all?' all?' 'not 'not at at all,' all,' said said traddles. traddles. i i promised promised traddles traddles that that he he should should hear hear dora dora sing, sing, and and see see some some of of her her flower-painting. flower-painting. he he said said he he should should like like it it very very much, much, and and we we went went home home arm arm in in arm arm in in great great good good humour humour and and delight. delight. i i encouraged encouraged him him to to talk talk about about sophy, sophy, on on the the way; way; which which he he did did with with a a loving loving reliance reliance on on her her that that i i very very much much admired. admired. i i compared compared her her in in my my mind mind with with dora, dora, with with considerable considerable inward inward satisfaction; satisfaction; but but i i candidly candidly admitted admitted to to myself myself that that she she seemed seemed to to be be an an excellent excellent kind kind of of girl girl for for traddles, traddles, too. too. of of course course my my aunt aunt was was immediately immediately made made acquainted acquainted with with the the successful successful issue issue of of the the conference, conference, and and with with all all that that had had been been said said and and done done in in the the course course of of it. it. she she was was happy happy to to see see me me so so happy, happy, and and promised promised to to call call on on dora's dora's aunts aunts without without loss loss of of time. time. but but she she took took such such a a long long walk walk up up and and down down our our rooms rooms that that night, night, while while i i was was writing writing to to agnes, agnes, that that i i began began to to think think she she meant meant to to walk walk till till morning. morning. my my letter letter to to agnes agnes was was a a fervent fervent and and grateful grateful one, one, narrating narrating all all the the good good effects effects that that had had resulted resulted from from my my following following her her advice. advice. she she wrote, wrote, by by return return of of post, post, to to me. me. her her letter letter was was hopeful, hopeful, earnest, earnest, and and cheerful. cheerful. she she was was always always cheerful cheerful from from that that time. time. i i had had my my hands hands more more full full than than ever, ever, now. now. my my daily daily journeys journeys to to highgate highgate considered, considered, putney putney was was a a long long way way off; off; and and i i naturally naturally wanted wanted to to go go there there as as often often as as i i could. could. the the proposed proposed tea-drinkings tea-drinkings being being quite quite impracticable, impracticable, i i compounded compounded with with miss miss lavinia lavinia for for permission permission to to visit visit every every saturday saturday afternoon, afternoon, without without detriment detriment to to my my privileged privileged sundays. sundays. so, so, the the close close of of every every week week was was a a delicious delicious time time for for me; me; and and i i got got through through the the rest rest of of the the week week by by looking looking forward forward to to it. it. i i was was wonderfully wonderfully relieved relieved to to find find that that my my aunt aunt and and dora's dora's aunts aunts rubbed rubbed on, on, all all things things considered, considered, much much more more smoothly smoothly than than i i could could have have expected. expected. my my aunt aunt made made her her promised promised visit visit within within a a few few days days of of the the conference; conference; and and within within a a few few more more days, days, dora's dora's aunts aunts called called upon upon her, her, in in due due state state and and form. form. similar similar but but more more friendly friendly exchanges exchanges took took place place afterwards, afterwards, usually usually at at intervals intervals of of three three or or four four weeks. weeks. i i know know that that my my aunt aunt distressed distressed dora's dora's aunts aunts very very much, much, by by utterly utterly setting setting at at naught naught the the dignity dignity of of fly-conveyance, fly-conveyance, and and walking walking out out to to putney putney at at extraordinary extraordinary times, times, as as shortly shortly after after breakfast breakfast or or just just before before tea; tea; likewise likewise by by wearing wearing her her bonnet bonnet in in any any manner manner that that happened happened to to be be comfortable comfortable to to her her head, head, without without at at all all deferring deferring to to the the prejudices prejudices of of civilization civilization on on that that subject. subject. but but dora's dora's aunts aunts soon soon agreed agreed to to regard regard my my aunt aunt as as an an eccentric eccentric and and somewhat somewhat masculine masculine lady, lady, with with a a strong strong understanding; understanding; and and although although my my aunt aunt occasionally occasionally ruffled ruffled the the feathers feathers of of dora's dora's aunts, aunts, by by expressing expressing heretical heretical opinions opinions on on various various points points of of ceremony, ceremony, she she loved loved me me too too well well not not to to sacrifice sacrifice some some of of her her little little peculiarities peculiarities to to the the general general harmony. harmony. the the only only member member of of our our small small society society who who positively positively refused refused to to adapt adapt himself himself to to circumstances, circumstances, was was jip. jip. he he never never saw saw my my aunt aunt without without immediately immediately displaying displaying every every tooth tooth in in his his head, head, retiring retiring under under a a chair, chair, and and growling growling incessantly: incessantly: with with now now and and then then a a doleful doleful howl, howl, as as if if she she really really were were too too much much for for his his feelings. feelings. all all kinds kinds of of treatment treatment were were tried tried with with him, him, coaxing, coaxing, scolding, scolding, slapping, slapping, bringing bringing him him to to buckingham buckingham street street (where (where he he instantly instantly dashed dashed at at the the two two cats, cats, to to the the terror terror of of all all beholders); beholders); but but he he never never could could prevail prevail upon upon himself himself to to bear bear my my aunt's aunt's society. society. he he would would sometimes sometimes think think he he had had got got the the better better of of his his objection, objection, and and be be amiable amiable for for a a few few minutes; minutes; and and then then would would put put up up his his snub snub nose, nose, and and howl howl to to that that extent, extent, that that there there was was nothing nothing for for it it but but to to blind blind him him and and put put him him in in the the plate-warmer. plate-warmer. at at length, length, dora dora regularly regularly muffled muffled him him in in a a towel towel and and shut shut him him up up there, there, whenever whenever my my aunt aunt was was reported reported at at the the door. door. one one thing thing troubled troubled me me much, much, after after we we had had fallen fallen into into this this quiet quiet train. train. it it was, was, that that dora dora seemed seemed by by one one consent consent to to be be regarded regarded like like a a pretty pretty toy toy or or plaything. plaything. my my aunt, aunt, with with whom whom she she gradually gradually became became familiar, familiar, always always called called her her little little blossom; blossom; and and the the pleasure pleasure of of miss miss lavinia's lavinia's life life was was to to wait wait upon upon her, her, curl curl her her hair, hair, make make ornaments ornaments for for her, her, and and treat treat her her like like a a pet pet child. child. what what miss miss lavinia lavinia did, did, her her sister sister did did as as a a matter matter of of course. course. it it was was very very odd odd to to me; me; but but they they all all seemed seemed to to treat treat dora, dora, in in her her degree, degree, much much as as dora dora treated treated jip jip in in his. his. i i made made up up my my mind mind to to speak speak to to dora dora about about this; this; and and one one day day when when we we were were out out walking walking (for (for we we were were licensed licensed by by miss miss lavinia, lavinia, after after a a while, while, to to go go out out walking walking by by ourselves), ourselves), i i said said to to her her that that i i wished wished she she could could get get them them to to behave behave towards towards her her differently. differently. 'because 'because you know, know, my my darling,' darling,' i i remonstrated, remonstrated, 'you are are not not a a child.' child.' 'there!' 'there!' said said dora. dora. 'now 'now you're you're going going to to be be cross!' cross!' 'cross, 'cross, my my love?' love?' 'i 'i am am sure sure they're they're very very kind kind to to me,' me,' said said dora, dora, 'and 'and i i am am very very happy happy -- -- ' ' 'well! 'well! but but my my dearest dearest life!' life!' said said i, i, 'you might might be be very very happy, happy, and and yet yet be be treated treated rationally.' rationally.' dora dora gave gave me me a a reproachful reproachful look look -- -- the the prettiest prettiest look! look! -- -- and and then then began began to to sob, sob, saying, saying, if if i i didn't didn't like like her, her, why why had had i i ever ever wanted wanted so so much much to to be be engaged engaged to to her? her? and and why why didn't didn't i i go go away, away, now, now, if if i i couldn't couldn't bear bear her? her? what what could could i i do, do, but but kiss kiss away away her her tears, tears, and and tell tell her her how how i i doted doted on on her, her, after after that! that! 'i 'i am am sure sure i i am am very very affectionate,' affectionate,' said said dora; dora; 'you oughtn't oughtn't to to be be cruel cruel to to me, me, doady!' doady!' 'cruel, 'cruel, my my precious precious love! love! as as if if i i would would -- -- or or could could -- -- be be cruel cruel to to you, for for the the world!' world!' 'then 'then don't don't find find fault fault with with me,' me,' said said dora, dora, making making a a rosebud rosebud of of her her mouth; mouth; 'and 'and i'll i'll be be good.' good.' i i was was charmed charmed by by her her presently presently asking asking me, me, of of her her own own accord, accord, to to give give her her that that cookery-book cookery-book i i had had once once spoken spoken of, of, and and to to show show her her how how to to keep keep accounts accounts as as i i had had once once promised promised i i would. would. i i brought brought the the volume volume with with me me on on my my next next visit visit (i (i got got it it prettily prettily bound, bound, first, first, to to make make it it look look less less dry dry and and more more inviting); inviting); and and as as we we strolled strolled about about the the common, common, i i showed showed her her an an old old housekeeping-book housekeeping-book of of my my aunt's, aunt's, and and gave gave her her a a set set of of tablets, tablets, and and a a pretty pretty little little pencil-case pencil-case and and box box of of leads, leads, to to practise practise housekeeping housekeeping with. with. but but the the cookery-book cookery-book made made dora's dora's head head ache, ache, and and the the figures figures made made her her cry. cry. they they wouldn't wouldn't add add up, up, she she said. said. so so she she rubbed rubbed them them out, out, and and drew drew little little nosegays nosegays and and likenesses likenesses of of me me and and jip, jip, all all over over the the tablets. tablets. then then i i playfully playfully tried tried verbal verbal instruction instruction in in domestic domestic matters, matters, as as we we walked walked about about on on a a saturday saturday afternoon. afternoon. sometimes, sometimes, for for example, example, when when we we passed passed a a butcher's butcher's shop, shop, i i would would say: say: 'now 'now suppose, suppose, my my pet, pet, that that we we were were married, married, and and you were were going going to to buy buy a a shoulder shoulder of of mutton mutton for for dinner, dinner, would would you know know how how to to buy buy it?' it?' my my pretty pretty little little dora's dora's face face would would fall, fall, and and she she would would make make her her mouth mouth into into a a bud bud again, again, as as if if she she would would very very much much prefer prefer to to shut shut mine mine with with a a kiss. kiss. 'would 'would you know know how how to to buy buy it, it, my my darling?' darling?' i i would would repeat, repeat, perhaps, perhaps, if if i i were were very very inflexible. inflexible. dora dora would would think think a a little, little, and and then then reply, reply, perhaps, perhaps, with with great great triumph: triumph: 'why, 'why, the the butcher butcher would would know know how how to to sell sell it, it, and and what what need need i i know? know? oh, oh, you silly silly boy!' boy!' so, so, when when i i once once asked asked dora, dora, with with an an eye eye to to the the cookery-book, cookery-book, what what she she would would do, do, if if we we were were married, married, and and i i were were to to say say i i should should like like a a nice nice irish irish stew, stew, she she replied replied that that she she would would tell tell the the servant servant to to make make it; it; and and then then clapped clapped her her little little hands hands together together across across my my arm, arm, and and laughed laughed in in such such a a charming charming manner manner that that she she was was more more delightful delightful than than ever. ever. consequently, consequently, the the principal principal use use to to which which the the cookery-book cookery-book was was devoted, devoted, was was being being put put down down in in the the corner corner for for jip jip to to stand stand upon. upon. but but dora dora was was so so pleased, pleased, when when she she had had trained trained him him to to stand stand upon upon it it without without offering offering to to come come off, off, and and at at the the same same time time to to hold hold the the pencil-case pencil-case in in his his mouth, mouth, that that i i was was very very glad glad i i had had bought bought it. it. and and we we fell fell back back on on the the guitar-case, guitar-case, and and the the flower-painting, flower-painting, and and the the songs songs about about never never leaving leaving off off dancing, dancing, ta ta ra ra la! la! and and were were as as happy happy as as the the week week was was long. long. i i occasionally occasionally wished wished i i could could venture venture to to hint hint to to miss miss lavinia, lavinia, that that she she treated treated the the darling darling of of my my heart heart a a little little too too much much like like a a plaything; plaything; and and i i sometimes sometimes awoke, awoke, as as it it were, were, wondering wondering to to find find that that i i had had fallen fallen into into the the general general fault, fault, and and treated treated her her like like a a plaything plaything too too -- -- but but not not often. often. chapter chapter 42. 42. mischief mischief i i feel feel as as if if it it were were not not for for me me to to record, record, even even though though this this manuscript manuscript is is intended intended for for no no eyes eyes but but mine, mine, how how hard hard i i worked worked at at that that tremendous tremendous short-hand, short-hand, and and all all improvement improvement appertaining appertaining to to it, it, in in my my sense sense of of responsibility responsibility to to dora dora and and her her aunts. aunts. i i will will only only add, add, to to what what i i have have already already written written of of my my perseverance perseverance at at this this time time of of my my life, life, and and of of a a patient patient and and continuous continuous energy energy which which then then began began to to be be matured matured within within me, me, and and which which i i know know to to be be the the strong strong part part of of my my character, character, if if it it have have any any strength strength at at all, all, that that there, there, on on looking looking back, back, i i find find the the source source of of my my success. success. i i have have been been very very fortunate fortunate in in worldly worldly matters; matters; many many men men have have worked worked much much harder, harder, and and not not succeeded succeeded half half so so well; well; but but i i never never could could have have done done what what i i have have done, done, without without the the habits habits of of punctuality, punctuality, order, order, and and diligence, diligence, without without the the determination determination to to concentrate concentrate myself myself on on one one object object at at a a time, time, no no matter matter how how quickly quickly its its successor successor should should come come upon upon its its heels, heels, which which i i then then formed. formed. heaven heaven knows knows i i write write this, this, in in no no spirit spirit of of self-laudation. self-laudation. the the man man who who reviews reviews his his own own life, life, as as i i do do mine, mine, in in going going on on here, here, from from page page to to page, page, had had need need to to have have been been a a good good man man indeed, indeed, if if he he would would be be spared spared the the sharp sharp consciousness consciousness of of many many talents talents neglected, neglected, many many opportunities opportunities wasted, wasted, many many erratic erratic and and perverted perverted feelings feelings constantly constantly at at war war within within his his breast, breast, and and defeating defeating him. him. i i do do not not hold hold one one natural natural gift, gift, i i dare dare say, say, that that i i have have not not abused. abused. my my meaning meaning simply simply is, is, that that whatever whatever i i have have tried tried to to do do in in life, life, i i have have tried tried with with all all my my heart heart to to do do well; well; that that whatever whatever i i have have devoted devoted myself myself to, to, i i have have devoted devoted myself myself to to completely; completely; that that in in great great aims aims and and in in small, small, i i have have always always been been thoroughly thoroughly in in earnest. earnest. i i have have never never believed believed it it possible possible that that any any natural natural or or improved improved ability ability can can claim claim immunity immunity from from the the companionship companionship of of the the steady, steady, plain, plain, hard-working hard-working qualities, qualities, and and hope hope to to gain gain its its end. end. there there is is no no such such thing thing as as such such fulfilment fulfilment on on this this earth. earth. some some happy happy talent, talent, and and some some fortunate fortunate opportunity, opportunity, may may form form the the two two sides sides of of the the ladder ladder on on which which some some men men mount, mount, but but the the rounds rounds of of that that ladder ladder must must be be made made of of stuff stuff to to stand stand wear wear and and tear; tear; and and there there is is no no substitute substitute for for thorough-going, thorough-going, ardent, ardent, and and sincere sincere earnestness. earnestness. never never to to put put one one hand hand to to anything, anything, on on which which i i could could throw throw my my whole whole self; self; and and never never to to affect affect depreciation depreciation of of my my work, work, whatever whatever it it was; was; i i find, find, now, now, to to have have been been my my golden golden rules. rules. how how much much of of the the practice practice i i have have just just reduced reduced to to precept, precept, i i owe owe to to agnes, agnes, i i will will not not repeat repeat here. here. my my narrative narrative proceeds proceeds to to agnes, agnes, with with a a thankful thankful love. love. she she came came on on a a visit visit of of a a fortnight fortnight to to the the doctor's. doctor's. mr. mr. wickfield wickfield was was the the doctor's doctor's old old friend, friend, and and the the doctor doctor wished wished to to talk talk with with him, him, and and do do him him good. good. it it had had been been matter matter of of conversation conversation with with agnes agnes when when she she was was last last in in town, town, and and this this visit visit was was the the result. result. she she and and her her father father came came together. together. i i was was not not much much surprised surprised to to hear hear from from her her that that she she had had engaged engaged to to find find a a lodging lodging in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood for for mrs. mrs. heep, heep, whose whose rheumatic rheumatic complaint complaint required required change change of of air, air, and and who who would would be be charmed charmed to to have have it it in in such such company. company. neither neither was was i i surprised surprised when, when, on on the the very very next next day, day, uriah, uriah, like like a a dutiful dutiful son, son, brought brought his his worthy worthy mother mother to to take take possession. possession. 'you see, see, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said he, he, as as he he forced forced himself himself upon upon my my company company for for a a turn turn in in the the doctor's doctor's garden, garden, 'where 'where a a person person loves, loves, a a person person is is a a little little jealous jealous -- -- leastways, leastways, anxious anxious to to keep keep an an eye eye on on the the beloved beloved one.' one.' 'of 'of whom whom are are you jealous, jealous, now?' now?' said said i. i. 'thanks 'thanks to to you, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he returned, returned, 'of 'of no no one one in in particular particular just just at at present present -- -- no no male male person, person, at at least.' least.' 'do 'do you mean mean that that you are are jealous jealous of of a a female female person?' person?' he he gave gave me me a a sidelong sidelong glance glance out out of of his his sinister sinister red red eyes, eyes, and and laughed. laughed. 'really, 'really, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he said, said, ' ' -- -- i i should should say say mister, mister, but but i i know know you'll you'll excuse excuse the the abit abit i've i've got got into into -- -- you're you're so so insinuating, insinuating, that that you draw draw me me like like a a corkscrew! corkscrew! well, well, i i don't don't mind mind telling telling you,' putting putting his his fish-like fish-like hand hand on on mine, mine, 'i'm 'i'm not not a a lady's lady's man man in in general, general, sir, sir, and and i i never never was, was, with with mrs. mrs. strong.' strong.' his his eyes eyes looked looked green green now, now, as as they they watched watched mine mine with with a a rascally rascally cunning. cunning. 'what 'what do do you mean?' mean?' said said i. i. 'why, 'why, though though i i am am a a lawyer, lawyer, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replied, replied, with with a a dry dry grin, grin, 'i 'i mean, mean, just just at at present, present, what what i i say.' say.' 'and 'and what what do do you mean mean by by your your look?' look?' i i retorted, retorted, quietly. quietly. 'by 'by my my look? look? dear dear me, me, copperfield, copperfield, that's that's sharp sharp practice! practice! what what do do i i mean mean by by my my look?' look?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i. i. 'by 'by your your look.' look.' he he seemed seemed very very much much amused, amused, and and laughed laughed as as heartily heartily as as it it was was in in his his nature nature to to laugh. laugh. after after some some scraping scraping of of his his chin chin with with his his hand, hand, he he went went on on to to say, say, with with his his eyes eyes cast cast downward downward -- -- still still scraping, scraping, very very slowly: slowly: 'when 'when i i was was but but an an umble umble clerk, clerk, she she always always looked looked down down upon upon me. me. she she was was for for ever ever having having my my agnes agnes backwards backwards and and forwards forwards at at her her ouse, ouse, and and she she was was for for ever ever being being a a friend friend to to you, master master copperfield; copperfield; but but i i was was too too far far beneath beneath her, her, myself, myself, to to be be noticed.' noticed.' 'well?' 'well?' said said i; i; 'suppose 'suppose you were!' were!' ' ' -- -- and and beneath beneath him him too,' too,' pursued pursued uriah, uriah, very very distinctly, distinctly, and and in in a a meditative meditative tone tone of of voice, voice, as as he he continued continued to to scrape scrape his his chin. chin. 'don't 'don't you know know the the doctor doctor better,' better,' said said i, i, 'than 'than to to suppose suppose him him conscious conscious of of your your existence, existence, when when you were were not not before before him?' him?' he he directed directed his his eyes eyes at at me me in in that that sidelong sidelong glance glance again, again, and and he he made made his his face face very very lantern-jawed, lantern-jawed, for for the the greater greater convenience convenience of of scraping, scraping, as as he he answered: answered: 'oh 'oh dear, dear, i i am am not not referring referring to to the the doctor! doctor! oh oh no, no, poor poor man! man! i i mean mean mr. mr. maldon!' maldon!' my my heart heart quite quite died died within within me. me. all all my my old old doubts doubts and and apprehensions apprehensions on on that that subject, subject, all all the the doctor's doctor's happiness happiness and and peace, peace, all all the the mingled mingled possibilities possibilities of of innocence innocence and and compromise, compromise, that that i i could could not not unravel, unravel, i i saw, saw, in in a a moment, moment, at at the the mercy mercy of of this this fellow's fellow's twisting. twisting. 'he 'he never never could could come come into into the the office, office, without without ordering ordering and and shoving shoving me me about,' about,' said said uriah. uriah. 'one 'one of of your your fine fine gentlemen gentlemen he he was! was! i i was was very very meek meek and and umble umble -- -- and and i i am. am. but but i i didn't didn't like like that that sort sort of of thing thing -- -- and and i i don't!' don't!' he he left left off off scraping scraping his his chin, chin, and and sucked sucked in in his his cheeks cheeks until until they they seemed seemed to to meet meet inside; inside; keeping keeping his his sidelong sidelong glance glance upon upon me me all all the the while. while. 'she 'she is is one one of of your your lovely lovely women, women, she she is,' is,' he he pursued, pursued, when when he he had had slowly slowly restored restored his his face face to to its its natural natural form; form; 'and 'and ready ready to to be be no no friend friend to to such such as as me, me, i i know. know. she's she's just just the the person person as as would would put put my my agnes agnes up up to to higher higher sort sort of of game. game. now, now, i i ain't ain't one one of of your your lady's lady's men, men, master master copperfield; copperfield; but but i've i've had had eyes eyes in in my my ed, ed, a a pretty pretty long long time time back. back. we we umble umble ones ones have have got got eyes, eyes, mostly mostly speaking speaking -- -- and and we we look look out out of of 'em.' 'em.' i i endeavoured endeavoured to to appear appear unconscious unconscious and and not not disquieted, disquieted, but, but, i i saw saw in in his his face, face, with with poor poor success. success. 'now, 'now, i'm i'm not not a-going a-going to to let let myself myself be be run run down, down, copperfield,' copperfield,' he he continued, continued, raising raising that that part part of of his his countenance, countenance, where where his his red red eyebrows eyebrows would would have have been been if if he he had had had had any, any, with with malignant malignant triumph, triumph, 'and 'and i i shall shall do do what what i i can can to to put put a a stop stop to to this this friendship. friendship. i i don't don't approve approve of of it. it. i i don't don't mind mind acknowledging acknowledging to to you that that i've i've got got rather rather a a grudging grudging disposition, disposition, and and want want to to keep keep off off all all intruders. intruders. i i ain't ain't a-going, a-going, if if i i know know it, it, to to run run the the risk risk of of being being plotted plotted against.' against.' 'you are are always always plotting, plotting, and and delude delude yourself yourself into into the the belief belief that that everybody everybody else else is is doing doing the the like, like, i i think,' think,' said said i. i. 'perhaps 'perhaps so, so, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replied. replied. 'but 'but i've i've got got a a motive, motive, as as my my fellow-partner fellow-partner used used to to say; say; and and i i go go at at it it tooth tooth and and nail. nail. i i mustn't mustn't be be put put upon, upon, as as a a numble numble person, person, too too much. much. i i can't can't allow allow people people in in my my way. way. really really they they must must come come out out of of the the cart, cart, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' 'i 'i don't don't understand understand you,' said said i. i. 'don't 'don't you, though?' though?' he he returned, returned, with with one one of of his his jerks. jerks. 'i'm 'i'm astonished astonished at at that, that, master master copperfield, copperfield, you being being usually usually so so quick! quick! i'll i'll try try to to be be plainer, plainer, another another time. time. -- -- -is -is that that mr. mr. maldon maldon a-norseback, a-norseback, ringing ringing at at the the gate, gate, sir?' sir?' 'it 'it looks looks like like him,' him,' i i replied, replied, as as carelessly carelessly as as i i could. could. uriah uriah stopped stopped short, short, put put his his hands hands between between his his great great knobs knobs of of knees, knees, and and doubled doubled himself himself up up with with laughter. laughter. with with perfectly perfectly silent silent laughter. laughter. not not a a sound sound escaped escaped from from him. him. i i was was so so repelled repelled by by his his odious odious behaviour, behaviour, particularly particularly by by this this concluding concluding instance, instance, that that i i turned turned away away without without any any ceremony; ceremony; and and left left him him doubled doubled up up in in the the middle middle of of the the garden, garden, like like a a scarecrow scarecrow in in want want of of support. support. it it was was not not on on that that evening; evening; but, but, as as i i well well remember, remember, on on the the next next evening evening but but one, one, which which was was a a sunday; sunday; that that i i took took agnes agnes to to see see dora. dora. i i had had arranged arranged the the visit, visit, beforehand, beforehand, with with miss miss lavinia; lavinia; and and agnes agnes was was expected expected to to tea. tea. i i was was in in a a flutter flutter of of pride pride and and anxiety; anxiety; pride pride in in my my dear dear little little betrothed, betrothed, and and anxiety anxiety that that agnes agnes should should like like her. her. all all the the way way to to putney, putney, agnes agnes being being inside inside the the stage-coach, stage-coach, and and i i outside, outside, i i pictured pictured dora dora to to myself myself in in every every one one of of the the pretty pretty looks looks i i knew knew so so well; well; now now making making up up my my mind mind that that i i should should like like her her to to look look exactly exactly as as she she looked looked at at such such a a time, time, and and then then doubting doubting whether whether i i should should not not prefer prefer her her looking looking as as she she looked looked at at such such another another time; time; and and almost almost worrying worrying myself myself into into a a fever fever about about it. it. i i was was troubled troubled by by no no doubt doubt of of her her being being very very pretty, pretty, in in any any case; case; but but it it fell fell out out that that i i had had never never seen seen her her look look so so well. well. she she was was not not in in the the drawing-room drawing-room when when i i presented presented agnes agnes to to her her little little aunts, aunts, but but was was shyly shyly keeping keeping out out of of the the way. way. i i knew knew where where to to look look for for her, her, now; now; and and sure sure enough enough i i found found her her stopping stopping her her ears ears again, again, behind behind the the same same dull dull old old door. door. at at first first she she wouldn't wouldn't come come at at all; all; and and then then she she pleaded pleaded for for five five minutes minutes by by my my watch. watch. when when at at length length she she put put her her arm arm through through mine, mine, to to be be taken taken to to the the drawing-room, drawing-room, her her charming charming little little face face was was flushed, flushed, and and had had never never been been so so pretty. pretty. but, but, when when we we went went into into the the room, room, and and it it turned turned pale, pale, she she was was ten ten thousand thousand times times prettier prettier yet. yet. dora dora was was afraid afraid of of agnes. agnes. she she had had told told me me that that she she knew knew agnes agnes was was 'too 'too clever'. clever'. but but when when she she saw saw her her looking looking at at once once so so cheerful cheerful and and so so earnest, earnest, and and so so thoughtful, thoughtful, and and so so good, good, she she gave gave a a faint faint little little cry cry of of pleased pleased surprise, surprise, and and just just put put her her affectionate affectionate arms arms round round agnes's agnes's neck, neck, and and laid laid her her innocent innocent cheek cheek against against her her face. face. i i never never was was so so happy. happy. i i never never was was so so pleased pleased as as when when i i saw saw those those two two sit sit down down together, together, side side by by side. side. as as when when i i saw saw my my little little darling darling looking looking up up so so naturally naturally to to those those cordial cordial eyes. eyes. as as when when i i saw saw the the tender, tender, beautiful beautiful regard regard which which agnes agnes cast cast upon upon her. her. miss miss lavinia lavinia and and miss miss clarissa clarissa partook, partook, in in their their way, way, of of my my joy. joy. it it was was the the pleasantest pleasantest tea-table tea-table in in the the world. world. miss miss clarissa clarissa presided. presided. i i cut cut and and handed handed the the sweet sweet seed-cake seed-cake -- -- the the little little sisters sisters had had a a bird-like bird-like fondness fondness for for picking picking up up seeds seeds and and pecking pecking at at sugar; sugar; miss miss lavinia lavinia looked looked on on with with benignant benignant patronage, patronage, as as if if our our happy happy love love were were all all her her work; work; and and we we were were perfectly perfectly contented contented with with ourselves ourselves and and one one another. another. the the gentle gentle cheerfulness cheerfulness of of agnes agnes went went to to all all their their hearts. hearts. her her quiet quiet interest interest in in everything everything that that interested interested dora; dora; her her manner manner of of making making acquaintance acquaintance with with jip jip (who (who responded responded instantly); instantly); her her pleasant pleasant way, way, when when dora dora was was ashamed ashamed to to come come over over to to her her usual usual seat seat by by me; me; her her modest modest grace grace and and ease, ease, eliciting eliciting a a crowd crowd of of blushing blushing little little marks marks of of confidence confidence from from dora; dora; seemed seemed to to make make our our circle circle quite quite complete. complete. 'i 'i am am so so glad,' glad,' said said dora, dora, after after tea, tea, 'that 'that you like like me. me. i i didn't didn't think think you would; would; and and i i want, want, more more than than ever, ever, to to be be liked, liked, now now julia julia mills mills is is gone.' gone.' i i have have omitted omitted to to mention mention it, it, by by the the by. by. miss miss mills mills had had sailed, sailed, and and dora dora and and i i had had gone gone aboard aboard a a great great east east indiaman indiaman at at gravesend gravesend to to see see her; her; and and we we had had had had preserved preserved ginger, ginger, and and guava, guava, and and other other delicacies delicacies of of that that sort sort for for lunch; lunch; and and we we had had left left miss miss mills mills weeping weeping on on a a camp-stool camp-stool on on the the quarter-deck, quarter-deck, with with a a large large new new diary diary under under her her arm, arm, in in which which the the original original reflections reflections awakened awakened by by the the contemplation contemplation of of ocean ocean were were to to be be recorded recorded under under lock lock and and key. key. agnes agnes said said she she was was afraid afraid i i must must have have given given her her an an unpromising unpromising character; character; but but dora dora corrected corrected that that directly. directly. 'oh 'oh no!' no!' she she said, said, shaking shaking her her curls curls at at me; me; 'it 'it was was all all praise. praise. he he thinks thinks so so much much of of your your opinion, opinion, that that i i was was quite quite afraid afraid of of it.' it.' 'my 'my good good opinion opinion cannot cannot strengthen strengthen his his attachment attachment to to some some people people whom whom he he knows,' knows,' said said agnes, agnes, with with a a smile; smile; 'it 'it is is not not worth worth their their having.' having.' 'but 'but please please let let me me have have it,' it,' said said dora, dora, in in her her coaxing coaxing way, way, 'if 'if you can!' can!' we we made made merry merry about about dora's dora's wanting wanting to to be be liked, liked, and and dora dora said said i i was was a a goose, goose, and and she she didn't didn't like like me me at at any any rate, rate, and and the the short short evening evening flew flew away away on on gossamer-wings. gossamer-wings. the the time time was was at at hand hand when when the the coach coach was was to to call call for for us. us. i i was was standing standing alone alone before before the the fire, fire, when when dora dora came came stealing stealing softly softly in, in, to to give give me me that that usual usual precious precious little little kiss kiss before before i i went. went. 'don't 'don't you think, think, if if i i had had had had her her for for a a friend friend a a long long time time ago, ago, doady,' doady,' said said dora, dora, her her bright bright eyes eyes shining shining very very brightly, brightly, and and her her little little right right hand hand idly idly busying busying itself itself with with one one of of the the buttons buttons of of my my coat, coat, 'i 'i might might have have been been more more clever clever perhaps?' perhaps?' 'my 'my love!' love!' said said i, i, 'what 'what nonsense!' nonsense!' 'do 'do you think think it it is is nonsense?' nonsense?' returned returned dora, dora, without without looking looking at at me. me. 'are 'are you sure sure it it is?' is?' 'of 'of course course i i am!' am!' 'i 'i have have forgotten,' forgotten,' said said dora, dora, still still turning turning the the button button round round and and round, round, 'what 'what relation relation agnes agnes is is to to you, you dear dear bad bad boy.' boy.' 'no 'no blood-relation,' blood-relation,' i i replied; replied; 'but 'but we we were were brought brought up up together, together, like like brother brother and and sister.' sister.' 'i 'i wonder wonder why why you ever ever fell fell in in love love with with me?' me?' said said dora, dora, beginning beginning on on another another button button of of my my coat. coat. 'perhaps 'perhaps because because i i couldn't couldn't see see you, and and not not love love you, dora!' dora!' 'suppose 'suppose you had had never never seen seen me me at at all,' all,' said said dora, dora, going going to to another another button. button. 'suppose 'suppose we we had had never never been been born!' born!' said said i, i, gaily. gaily. i i wondered wondered what what she she was was thinking thinking about, about, as as i i glanced glanced in in admiring admiring silence silence at at the the little little soft soft hand hand travelling travelling up up the the row row of of buttons buttons on on my my coat, coat, and and at at the the clustering clustering hair hair that that lay lay against against my my breast, breast, and and at at the the lashes lashes of of her her downcast downcast eyes, eyes, slightly slightly rising rising as as they they followed followed her her idle idle fingers. fingers. at at length length her her eyes eyes were were lifted lifted up up to to mine, mine, and and she she stood stood on on tiptoe tiptoe to to give give me, me, more more thoughtfully thoughtfully than than usual, usual, that that precious precious little little kiss kiss -- -- once, once, twice, twice, three three times times -- -- and and went went out out of of the the room. room. they they all all came came back back together together within within five five minutes minutes afterwards, afterwards, and and dora's dora's unusual unusual thoughtfulness thoughtfulness was was quite quite gone gone then. then. she she was was laughingly laughingly resolved resolved to to put put jip jip through through the the whole whole of of his his performances, performances, before before the the coach coach came. came. they they took took some some time time (not (not so so much much on on account account of of their their variety, variety, as as jip's jip's reluctance), reluctance), and and were were still still unfinished unfinished when when it it was was heard heard at at the the door. door. there there was was a a hurried hurried but but affectionate affectionate parting parting between between agnes agnes and and herself; herself; and and dora dora was was to to write write to to agnes agnes (who (who was was not not to to mind mind her her letters letters being being foolish, foolish, she she said), said), and and agnes agnes was was to to write write to to dora; dora; and and they they had had a a second second parting parting at at the the coach coach door, door, and and a a third third when when dora, dora, in in spite spite of of the the remonstrances remonstrances of of miss miss lavinia, lavinia, would would come come running running out out once once more more to to remind remind agnes agnes at at the the coach coach window window about about writing, writing, and and to to shake shake her her curls curls at at me me on on the the box. box. the the stage-coach stage-coach was was to to put put us us down down near near covent covent garden, garden, where where we we were were to to take take another another stage-coach stage-coach for for highgate. highgate. i i was was impatient impatient for for the the short short walk walk in in the the interval, interval, that that agnes agnes might might praise praise dora dora to to me. me. ah! ah! what what praise praise it it was! was! how how lovingly lovingly and and fervently fervently did did it it commend commend the the pretty pretty creature creature i i had had won, won, with with all all her her artless artless graces graces best best displayed, displayed, to to my my most most gentle gentle care! care! how how thoughtfully thoughtfully remind remind me, me, yet yet with with no no pretence pretence of of doing doing so, so, of of the the trust trust in in which which i i held held the the orphan orphan child! child! never, never, never, never, had had i i loved loved dora dora so so deeply deeply and and truly, truly, as as i i loved loved her her that that night. night. when when we we had had again again alighted, alighted, and and were were walking walking in in the the starlight starlight along along the the quiet quiet road road that that led led to to the the doctor's doctor's house, house, i i told told agnes agnes it it was was her her doing. doing. 'when 'when you were were sitting sitting by by her,' her,' said said i, i, 'you seemed seemed to to be be no no less less her her guardian guardian angel angel than than mine; mine; and and you seem seem so so now, now, agnes.' agnes.' 'a 'a poor poor angel,' angel,' she she returned, returned, 'but 'but faithful.' faithful.' the the clear clear tone tone of of her her voice, voice, going going straight straight to to my my heart, heart, made made it it natural natural to to me me to to say: say: 'the 'the cheerfulness cheerfulness that that belongs belongs to to you, agnes agnes (and (and to to no no one one else else that that ever ever i i have have seen), seen), is is so so restored, restored, i i have have observed observed today, today, that that i i have have begun begun to to hope hope you are are happier happier at at home?' home?' 'i 'i am am happier happier in in myself,' myself,' she she said; said; 'i 'i am am quite quite cheerful cheerful and and light-hearted.' light-hearted.' i i glanced glanced at at the the serene serene face face looking looking upward, upward, and and thought thought it it was was the the stars stars that that made made it it seem seem so so noble. noble. 'there 'there has has been been no no change change at at home,' home,' said said agnes, agnes, after after a a few few moments. moments. 'no 'no fresh fresh reference,' reference,' said said i, i, 'to 'to -- -- i i wouldn't wouldn't distress distress you, agnes, agnes, but but i i cannot cannot help help asking asking -- -- to to what what we we spoke spoke of, of, when when we we parted parted last?' last?' 'no, 'no, none,' none,' she she answered. answered. 'i 'i have have thought thought so so much much about about it.' it.' 'you must must think think less less about about it. it. remember remember that that i i confide confide in in simple simple love love and and truth truth at at last. last. have have no no apprehensions apprehensions for for me, me, trotwood,' trotwood,' she she added, added, after after a a moment; moment; 'the 'the step step you dread dread my my taking, taking, i i shall shall never never take.' take.' although although i i think think i i had had never never really really feared feared it, it, in in any any season season of of cool cool reflection, reflection, it it was was an an unspeakable unspeakable relief relief to to me me to to have have this this assurance assurance from from her her own own truthful truthful lips. lips. i i told told her her so, so, earnestly. earnestly. 'and 'and when when this this visit visit is is over,' over,' said said i, i, -- -- 'for 'for we we may may not not be be alone alone another another time, time, -- -- how how long long is is it it likely likely to to be, be, my my dear dear agnes, agnes, before before you come come to to london london again?' again?' 'probably 'probably a a long long time,' time,' she she replied; replied; 'i 'i think think it it will will be be best best -- -- for for papa's papa's sake sake -- -- to to remain remain at at home. home. we we are are not not likely likely to to meet meet often, often, for for some some time time to to come; come; but but i i shall shall be be a a good good correspondent correspondent of of dora's, dora's, and and we we shall shall frequently frequently hear hear of of one one another another that that way.' way.' we we were were now now within within the the little little courtyard courtyard of of the the doctor's doctor's cottage. cottage. it it was was growing growing late. late. there there was was a a light light in in the the window window of of mrs. mrs. strong's strong's chamber, chamber, and and agnes, agnes, pointing pointing to to it, it, bade bade me me good good night. night. 'do 'do not not be be troubled,' troubled,' she she said, said, giving giving me me her her hand, hand, 'by 'by our our misfortunes misfortunes and and anxieties. anxieties. i i can can be be happier happier in in nothing nothing than than in in your your happiness. happiness. if if you can can ever ever give give me me help, help, rely rely upon upon it it i i will will ask ask you for for it. it. god god bless bless you always!' always!' in in her her beaming beaming smile, smile, and and in in these these last last tones tones of of her her cheerful cheerful voice, voice, i i seemed seemed again again to to see see and and hear hear my my little little dora dora in in her her company. company. i i stood stood awhile, awhile, looking looking through through the the porch porch at at the the stars, stars, with with a a heart heart full full of of love love and and gratitude, gratitude, and and then then walked walked slowly slowly forth. forth. i i had had engaged engaged a a bed bed at at a a decent decent alehouse alehouse close close by, by, and and was was going going out out at at the the gate, gate, when, when, happening happening to to turn turn my my head, head, i i saw saw a a light light in in the the doctor's doctor's study. study. a a half-reproachful half-reproachful fancy fancy came came into into my my mind, mind, that that he he had had been been working working at at the the dictionary dictionary without without my my help. help. with with the the view view of of seeing seeing if if this this were were so, so, and, and, in in any any case, case, of of bidding bidding him him good good night, night, if if he he were were yet yet sitting sitting among among his his books, books, i i turned turned back, back, and and going going softly softly across across the the hall, hall, and and gently gently opening opening the the door, door, looked looked in. in. the the first first person person whom whom i i saw, saw, to to my my surprise, surprise, by by the the sober sober light light of of the the shaded shaded lamp, lamp, was was uriah. uriah. he he was was standing standing close close beside beside it, it, with with one one of of his his skeleton skeleton hands hands over over his his mouth, mouth, and and the the other other resting resting on on the the doctor's doctor's table. table. the the doctor doctor sat sat in in his his study study chair, chair, covering covering his his face face with with his his hands. hands. mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sorely sorely troubled troubled and and distressed, distressed, was was leaning leaning forward, forward, irresolutely irresolutely touching touching the the doctor's doctor's arm. arm. for for an an instant, instant, i i supposed supposed that that the the doctor doctor was was ill. ill. i i hastily hastily advanced advanced a a step step under under that that impression, impression, when when i i met met uriah's uriah's eye, eye, and and saw saw what what was was the the matter. matter. i i would would have have withdrawn, withdrawn, but but the the doctor doctor made made a a gesture gesture to to detain detain me, me, and and i i remained. remained. 'at 'at any any rate,' rate,' observed observed uriah, uriah, with with a a writhe writhe of of his his ungainly ungainly person, person, 'we 'we may may keep keep the the door door shut. shut. we we needn't needn't make make it it known known to to all all the the town.' town.' saying saying which, which, he he went went on on his his toes toes to to the the door, door, which which i i had had left left open, open, and and carefully carefully closed closed it. it. he he then then came came back, back, and and took took up up his his former former position. position. there there was was an an obtrusive obtrusive show show of of compassionate compassionate zeal zeal in in his his voice voice and and manner, manner, more more intolerable intolerable -- -- at at least least to to me me -- -- than than any any demeanour demeanour he he could could have have assumed. assumed. 'i 'i have have felt felt it it incumbent incumbent upon upon me, me, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, 'to 'to point point out out to to doctor doctor strong strong what what you and and me me have have already already talked talked about. about. you didn't didn't exactly exactly understand understand me, me, though?' though?' i i gave gave him him a a look, look, but but no no other other answer; answer; and, and, going going to to my my good good old old master, master, said said a a few few words words that that i i meant meant to to be be words words of of comfort comfort and and encouragement. encouragement. he he put put his his hand hand upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, as as it it had had been been his his custom custom to to do do when when i i was was quite quite a a little little fellow, fellow, but but did did not not lift lift his his grey grey head. head. 'as 'as you didn't didn't understand understand me, me, master master copperfield,' copperfield,' resumed resumed uriah uriah in in the the same same officious officious manner, manner, 'i 'i may may take take the the liberty liberty of of umbly umbly mentioning, mentioning, being being among among friends, friends, that that i i have have called called doctor doctor strong's strong's attention attention to to the the goings-on goings-on of of mrs. mrs. strong. strong. it's it's much much against against the the grain grain with with me, me, i i assure assure you, copperfield, copperfield, to to be be concerned concerned in in anything anything so so unpleasant; unpleasant; but but really, really, as as it it is, is, we're we're all all mixing mixing ourselves ourselves up up with with what what oughtn't oughtn't to to be. be. that that was was what what my my meaning meaning was, was, sir, sir, when when you didn't didn't understand understand me.' me.' i i wonder wonder now, now, when when i i recall recall his his leer, leer, that that i i did did not not collar collar him, him, and and try try to to shake shake the the breath breath out out of of his his body. body. 'i 'i dare dare say say i i didn't didn't make make myself myself very very clear,' clear,' he he went went on, on, 'nor 'nor you neither. neither. naturally, naturally, we we was was both both of of us us inclined inclined to to give give such such a a subject subject a a wide wide berth. berth. hows'ever, hows'ever, at at last last i i have have made made up up my my mind mind to to speak speak plain; plain; and and i i have have mentioned mentioned to to doctor doctor strong strong that that -- -- did did you speak, speak, sir?' sir?' this this was was to to the the doctor, doctor, who who had had moaned. moaned. the the sound sound might might have have touched touched any any heart, heart, i i thought, thought, but but it it had had no no effect effect upon upon uriah's. uriah's. ' ' -- -- mentioned mentioned to to doctor doctor strong,' strong,' he he proceeded, proceeded, 'that 'that anyone anyone may may see see that that mr. mr. maldon, maldon, and and the the lovely lovely and and agreeable agreeable lady lady as as is is doctor doctor strong's strong's wife, wife, are are too too sweet sweet on on one one another. another. really really the the time time is is come come (we (we being being at at present present all all mixing mixing ourselves ourselves up up with with what what oughtn't oughtn't to to be), be), when when doctor doctor strong strong must must be be told told that that this this was was full full as as plain plain to to everybody everybody as as the the sun, sun, before before mr. mr. maldon maldon went went to to india; india; that that mr. mr. maldon maldon made made excuses excuses to to come come back, back, for for nothing nothing else; else; and and that that he's he's always always here, here, for for nothing nothing else. else. when when you come come in, in, sir, sir, i i was was just just putting putting it it to to my my fellow-partner,' fellow-partner,' towards towards whom whom he he turned, turned, 'to 'to say say to to doctor doctor strong strong upon upon his his word word and and honour, honour, whether whether he'd he'd ever ever been been of of this this opinion opinion long long ago, ago, or or not. not. come, come, mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sir! sir! would would you be be so so good good as as tell tell us? us? yes yes or or no, no, sir? sir? come, come, partner!' partner!' 'for 'for god's god's sake, sake, my my dear dear doctor,' doctor,' said said mr. mr. wickfield wickfield again again laying laying his his irresolute irresolute hand hand upon upon the the doctor's doctor's arm, arm, 'don't 'don't attach attach too too much much weight weight to to any any suspicions suspicions i i may may have have entertained.' entertained.' 'there!' 'there!' cried cried uriah, uriah, shaking shaking his his head. head. 'what 'what a a melancholy melancholy confirmation: confirmation: ain't ain't it? it? him! him! such such an an old old friend! friend! bless bless your your soul, soul, when when i i was was nothing nothing but but a a clerk clerk in in his his office, office, copperfield, copperfield, i've i've seen seen him him twenty twenty times, times, if if i've i've seen seen him him once, once, quite quite in in a a taking taking about about it it -- -- quite quite put put out, out, you know know (and (and very very proper proper in in him him as as a a father; father; i'm i'm sure sure i i can't can't blame blame him), him), to to think think that that miss miss agnes agnes was was mixing mixing herself herself up up with with what what oughtn't oughtn't to to be.' be.' 'my 'my dear dear strong,' strong,' said said mr. mr. wickfield wickfield in in a a tremulous tremulous voice, voice, 'my 'my good good friend, friend, i i needn't needn't tell tell you that that it it has has been been my my vice vice to to look look for for some some one one master master motive motive in in everybody, everybody, and and to to try try all all actions actions by by one one narrow narrow test. test. i i may may have have fallen fallen into into such such doubts doubts as as i i have have had, had, through through this this mistake.' mistake.' 'you have have had had doubts, doubts, wickfield,' wickfield,' said said the the doctor, doctor, without without lifting lifting up up his his head. head. 'you have have had had doubts.' doubts.' 'speak 'speak up, up, fellow-partner,' fellow-partner,' urged urged uriah. uriah. 'i 'i had, had, at at one one time, time, certainly,' certainly,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'i 'i -- -- god god forgive forgive me me -- -- i i thought thought you had.' had.' 'no, 'no, no, no, no!' no!' returned returned the the doctor, doctor, in in a a tone tone of of most most pathetic pathetic grief. grief. 'i 'i thought, thought, at at one one time,' time,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, 'that 'that you wished wished to to send send maldon maldon abroad abroad to to effect effect a a desirable desirable separation.' separation.' 'no, 'no, no, no, no!' no!' returned returned the the doctor. doctor. 'to 'to give give annie annie pleasure, pleasure, by by making making some some provision provision for for the the companion companion of of her her childhood. childhood. nothing nothing else.' else.' 'so 'so i i found,' found,' said said mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. 'i 'i couldn't couldn't doubt doubt it, it, when when you told told me me so. so. but but i i thought thought -- -- i i implore implore you to to remember remember the the narrow narrow construction construction which which has has been been my my besetting besetting sin sin -- -- that, that, in in a a case case where where there there was was so so much much disparity disparity in in point point of of years years -- -- ' ' 'that's 'that's the the way way to to put put it, it, you see, see, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' observed observed uriah, uriah, with with fawning fawning and and offensive offensive pity. pity. ' ' -- -- a a lady lady of of such such youth, youth, and and such such attractions, attractions, however however real real her her respect respect for for you, might might have have been been influenced influenced in in marrying, marrying, by by worldly worldly considerations considerations only. only. i i make make no no allowance allowance for for innumerable innumerable feelings feelings and and circumstances circumstances that that may may have have all all tended tended to to good. good. for for heaven's heaven's sake sake remember remember that!' that!' 'how 'how kind kind he he puts puts it!' it!' said said uriah, uriah, shaking shaking his his head. head. 'always 'always observing observing her her from from one one point point of of view,' view,' said said mr. mr. wickfield; wickfield; 'but 'but by by all all that that is is dear dear to to you, my my old old friend, friend, i i entreat entreat you to to consider consider what what it it was; was; i i am am forced forced to to confess confess now, now, having having no no escape-' escape-' 'no! 'no! there's there's no no way way out out of of it, it, mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sir,' sir,' observed observed uriah, uriah, 'when 'when it's it's got got to to this.' this.' ' ' -- -- that that i i did,' did,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, glancing glancing helplessly helplessly and and distractedly distractedly at at his his partner, partner, 'that 'that i i did did doubt doubt her, her, and and think think her her wanting wanting in in her her duty duty to to you; and and that that i i did did sometimes, sometimes, if if i i must must say say all, all, feel feel averse averse to to agnes agnes being being in in such such a a familiar familiar relation relation towards towards her, her, as as to to see see what what i i saw, saw, or or in in my my diseased diseased theory theory fancied fancied that that i i saw. saw. i i never never mentioned mentioned this this to to anyone. anyone. i i never never meant meant it it to to be be known known to to anyone. anyone. and and though though it it is is terrible terrible to to you to to hear,' hear,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, quite quite subdued, subdued, 'if 'if you knew knew how how terrible terrible it it is is for for me me to to tell, tell, you would would feel feel compassion compassion for for me!' me!' the the doctor, doctor, in in the the perfect perfect goodness goodness of of his his nature, nature, put put out out his his hand. hand. mr. mr. wickfield wickfield held held it it for for a a little little while while in in his, his, with with his his head head bowed bowed down. down. 'i 'i am am sure,' sure,' said said uriah, uriah, writhing writhing himself himself into into the the silence silence like like a a conger-eel, conger-eel, 'that 'that this this is is a a subject subject full full of of unpleasantness unpleasantness to to everybody. everybody. but but since since we we have have got got so so far, far, i i ought ought to to take take the the liberty liberty of of mentioning mentioning that that copperfield copperfield has has noticed noticed it it too.' too.' i i turned turned upon upon him, him, and and asked asked him him how how he he dared dared refer refer to to me! me! 'oh! 'oh! it's it's very very kind kind of of you, copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned uriah, uriah, undulating undulating all all over, over, 'and 'and we we all all know know what what an an amiable amiable character character yours yours is; is; but but you know know that that the the moment moment i i spoke spoke to to you the the other other night, night, you knew knew what what i i meant. meant. you know know you knew knew what what i i meant, meant, copperfield. copperfield. don't don't deny deny it! it! you deny deny it it with with the the best best intentions; intentions; but but don't don't do do it, it, copperfield.' copperfield.' i i saw saw the the mild mild eye eye of of the the good good old old doctor doctor turned turned upon upon me me for for a a moment, moment, and and i i felt felt that that the the confession confession of of my my old old misgivings misgivings and and remembrances remembrances was was too too plainly plainly written written in in my my face face to to be be overlooked. overlooked. it it was was of of no no use use raging. raging. i i could could not not undo undo that. that. say say what what i i would, would, i i could could not not unsay unsay it. it. we we were were silent silent again, again, and and remained remained so, so, until until the the doctor doctor rose rose and and walked walked twice twice or or thrice thrice across across the the room. room. presently presently he he returned returned to to where where his his chair chair stood; stood; and, and, leaning leaning on on the the back back of of it, it, and and occasionally occasionally putting putting his his handkerchief handkerchief to to his his eyes, eyes, with with a a simple simple honesty honesty that that did did him him more more honour, honour, to to my my thinking, thinking, than than any any disguise disguise he he could could have have effected, effected, said: said: 'i 'i have have been been much much to to blame. blame. i i believe believe i i have have been been very very much much to to blame. blame. i i have have exposed exposed one one whom whom i i hold hold in in my my heart, heart, to to trials trials and and aspersions aspersions -- -- i i call call them them aspersions, aspersions, even even to to have have been been conceived conceived in in anybody's anybody's inmost inmost mind mind -- -- of of which which she she never, never, but but for for me, me, could could have have been been the the object.' object.' uriah uriah heep heep gave gave a a kind kind of of snivel. snivel. i i think think to to express express sympathy. sympathy. 'of 'of which which my my annie,' annie,' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'never, 'never, but but for for me, me, could could have have been been the the object. object. gentlemen, gentlemen, i i am am old old now, now, as as you know; know; i i do do not not feel, feel, tonight, tonight, that that i i have have much much to to live live for. for. but but my my life life -- -- my my life life -- -- upon upon the the truth truth and and honour honour of of the the dear dear lady lady who who has has been been the the subject subject of of this this conversation!' conversation!' i i do do not not think think that that the the best best embodiment embodiment of of chivalry, chivalry, the the realization realization of of the the handsomest handsomest and and most most romantic romantic figure figure ever ever imagined imagined by by painter, painter, could could have have said said this, this, with with a a more more impressive impressive and and affecting affecting dignity dignity than than the the plain plain old old doctor doctor did. did. 'but 'but i i am am not not prepared,' prepared,' he he went went on, on, 'to 'to deny deny -- -- perhaps perhaps i i may may have have been, been, without without knowing knowing it, it, in in some some degree degree prepared prepared to to admit admit -- -- that that i i may may have have unwittingly unwittingly ensnared ensnared that that lady lady into into an an unhappy unhappy marriage. marriage. i i am am a a man man quite quite unaccustomed unaccustomed to to observe; observe; and and i i cannot cannot but but believe believe that that the the observation observation of of several several people, people, of of different different ages ages and and positions, positions, all all too too plainly plainly tending tending in in one one direction direction (and (and that that so so natural), natural), is is better better than than mine.' mine.' i i had had often often admired, admired, as as i i have have elsewhere elsewhere described, described, his his benignant benignant manner manner towards towards his his youthful youthful wife; wife; but but the the respectful respectful tenderness tenderness he he manifested manifested in in every every reference reference to to her her on on this this occasion, occasion, and and the the almost almost reverential reverential manner manner in in which which he he put put away away from from him him the the lightest lightest doubt doubt of of her her integrity, integrity, exalted exalted him, him, in in my my eyes, eyes, beyond beyond description. description. 'i 'i married married that that lady,' lady,' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'when 'when she she was was extremely extremely young. young. i i took took her her to to myself myself when when her her character character was was scarcely scarcely formed. formed. so so far far as as it it was was developed, developed, it it had had been been my my happiness happiness to to form form it. it. i i knew knew her her father father well. well. i i knew knew her her well. well. i i had had taught taught her her what what i i could, could, for for the the love love of of all all her her beautiful beautiful and and virtuous virtuous qualities. qualities. if if i i did did her her wrong; wrong; as as i i fear fear i i did, did, in in taking taking advantage advantage (but (but i i never never meant meant it) it) of of her her gratitude gratitude and and her her affection; affection; i i ask ask pardon pardon of of that that lady, lady, in in my my heart!' heart!' he he walked walked across across the the room, room, and and came came back back to to the the same same place; place; holding holding the the chair chair with with a a grasp grasp that that trembled, trembled, like like his his subdued subdued voice, voice, in in its its earnestness. earnestness. 'i 'i regarded regarded myself myself as as a a refuge, refuge, for for her, her, from from the the dangers dangers and and vicissitudes vicissitudes of of life. life. i i persuaded persuaded myself myself that, that, unequal unequal though though we we were were in in years, years, she she would would live live tranquilly tranquilly and and contentedly contentedly with with me. me. i i did did not not shut shut out out of of my my consideration consideration the the time time when when i i should should leave leave her her free, free, and and still still young young and and still still beautiful, beautiful, but but with with her her judgement judgement more more matured matured -- -- no, no, gentlemen gentlemen -- -- upon upon my my truth!' truth!' his his homely homely figure figure seemed seemed to to be be lightened lightened up up by by his his fidelity fidelity and and generosity. generosity. every every word word he he uttered uttered had had a a force force that that no no other other grace grace could could have have imparted imparted to to it. it. 'my 'my life life with with this this lady lady has has been been very very happy. happy. until until tonight, tonight, i i have have had had uninterrupted uninterrupted occasion occasion to to bless bless the the day day on on which which i i did did her her great great injustice.' injustice.' his his voice, voice, more more and and more more faltering faltering in in the the utterance utterance of of these these words, words, stopped stopped for for a a few few moments; moments; then then he he went went on: on: 'once 'once awakened awakened from from my my dream dream -- -- i i have have been been a a poor poor dreamer, dreamer, in in one one way way or or other, other, all all my my life life -- -- i i see see how how natural natural it it is is that that she she should should have have some some regretful regretful feeling feeling towards towards her her old old companion companion and and her her equal. equal. that that she she does does regard regard him him with with some some innocent innocent regret, regret, with with some some blameless blameless thoughts thoughts of of what what might might have have been, been, but but for for me, me, is, is, i i fear, fear, too too true. true. much much that that i i have have seen, seen, but but not not noted, noted, has has come come back back upon upon me me with with new new meaning, meaning, during during this this last last trying trying hour. hour. but, but, beyond beyond this, this, gentlemen, gentlemen, the the dear dear lady's lady's name name never never must must be be coupled coupled with with a a word, word, a a breath, breath, of of doubt.' doubt.' for for a a little little while, while, his his eye eye kindled kindled and and his his voice voice was was firm; firm; for for a a little little while while he he was was again again silent. silent. presently, presently, he he proceeded proceeded as as before: before: 'it 'it only only remains remains for for me, me, to to bear bear the the knowledge knowledge of of the the unhappiness unhappiness i i have have occasioned, occasioned, as as submissively submissively as as i i can. can. it it is is she she who who should should reproach; reproach; not not i. i. to to save save her her from from misconstruction, misconstruction, cruel cruel misconstruction, misconstruction, that that even even my my friends friends have have not not been been able able to to avoid, avoid, becomes becomes my my duty. duty. the the more more retired retired we we live, live, the the better better i i shall shall discharge discharge it. it. and and when when the the time time comes comes -- -- may may it it come come soon, soon, if if it it be be his his merciful merciful pleasure! pleasure! -- -- when when my my death death shall shall release release her her from from constraint, constraint, i i shall shall close close my my eyes eyes upon upon her her honoured honoured face, face, with with unbounded unbounded confidence confidence and and love; love; and and leave leave her, her, with with no no sorrow sorrow then, then, to to happier happier and and brighter brighter days.' days.' i i could could not not see see him him for for the the tears tears which which his his earnestness earnestness and and goodness, goodness, so so adorned adorned by, by, and and so so adorning, adorning, the the perfect perfect simplicity simplicity of of his his manner, manner, brought brought into into my my eyes. eyes. he he had had moved moved to to the the door, door, when when he he added: added: 'gentlemen, 'gentlemen, i i have have shown shown you my my heart. heart. i i am am sure sure you will will respect respect it. it. what what we we have have said said tonight tonight is is never never to to be be said said more. more. wickfield, wickfield, give give me me an an old old friend's friend's arm arm upstairs!' upstairs!' mr. mr. wickfield wickfield hastened hastened to to him. him. without without interchanging interchanging a a word word they they went went slowly slowly out out of of the the room room together, together, uriah uriah looking looking after after them. them. 'well, 'well, master master copperfield!' copperfield!' said said uriah, uriah, meekly meekly turning turning to to me. me. 'the 'the thing thing hasn't hasn't took took quite quite the the turn turn that that might might have have been been expected, expected, for for the the old old scholar scholar -- -- what what an an excellent excellent man! man! -- -- is is as as blind blind as as a a brickbat; brickbat; but but this this family's family's out out of of the the cart, cart, i i think!' think!' i i needed needed but but the the sound sound of of his his voice voice to to be be so so madly madly enraged enraged as as i i never never was was before, before, and and never never have have been been since. since. 'you villain,' villain,' said said i, i, 'what 'what do do you mean mean by by entrapping entrapping me me into into your your schemes? schemes? how how dare dare you appeal appeal to to me me just just now, now, you false false rascal, rascal, as as if if we we had had been been in in discussion discussion together?' together?' as as we we stood, stood, front front to to front, front, i i saw saw so so plainly, plainly, in in the the stealthy stealthy exultation exultation of of his his face, face, what what i i already already so so plainly plainly knew; knew; i i mean mean that that he he forced forced his his confidence confidence upon upon me, me, expressly expressly to to make make me me miserable, miserable, and and had had set set a a deliberate deliberate trap trap for for me me in in this this very very matter; matter; that that i i couldn't couldn't bear bear it. it. the the whole whole of of his his lank lank cheek cheek was was invitingly invitingly before before me, me, and and i i struck struck it it with with my my open open hand hand with with that that force force that that my my fingers fingers tingled tingled as as if if i i had had burnt burnt them. them. he he caught caught the the hand hand in in his, his, and and we we stood stood in in that that connexion, connexion, looking looking at at each each other. other. we we stood stood so, so, a a long long time; time; long long enough enough for for me me to to see see the the white white marks marks of of my my fingers fingers die die out out of of the the deep deep red red of of his his cheek, cheek, and and leave leave it it a a deeper deeper red. red. 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' he he said said at at length, length, in in a a breathless breathless voice, voice, 'have 'have you taken taken leave leave of of your your senses?' senses?' 'i 'i have have taken taken leave leave of of you,' said said i, i, wresting wresting my my hand hand away. away. 'you dog, dog, i'll i'll know know no no more more of of you.' 'won't 'won't you?' said said he, he, constrained constrained by by the the pain pain of of his his cheek cheek to to put put his his hand hand there. there. 'perhaps 'perhaps you won't won't be be able able to to help help it. it. isn't isn't this this ungrateful ungrateful of of you, now?' now?' 'i 'i have have shown shown you often often enough,' enough,' said said i, i, 'that 'that i i despise despise you. i i have have shown shown you now, now, more more plainly, plainly, that that i i do. do. why why should should i i dread dread your your doing doing your your worst worst to to all all about about you? what what else else do do you ever ever do?' do?' he he perfectly perfectly understood understood this this allusion allusion to to the the considerations considerations that that had had hitherto hitherto restrained restrained me me in in my my communications communications with with him. him. i i rather rather think think that that neither neither the the blow, blow, nor nor the the allusion, allusion, would would have have escaped escaped me, me, but but for for the the assurance assurance i i had had had had from from agnes agnes that that night. night. it it is is no no matter. matter. there there was was another another long long pause. pause. his his eyes, eyes, as as he he looked looked at at me, me, seemed seemed to to take take every every shade shade of of colour colour that that could could make make eyes eyes ugly. ugly. 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' he he said, said, removing removing his his hand hand from from his his cheek, cheek, 'you have have always always gone gone against against me. me. i i know know you always always used used to to be be against against me me at at mr. mr. wickfield's.' wickfield's.' 'you may may think think what what you like,' like,' said said i, i, still still in in a a towering towering rage. rage. 'if 'if it it is is not not true, true, so so much much the the worthier worthier you.' 'and 'and yet yet i i always always liked liked you, copperfield!' copperfield!' he he rejoined. rejoined. i i deigned deigned to to make make him him no no reply; reply; and, and, taking taking up up my my hat, hat, was was going going out out to to bed, bed, when when he he came came between between me me and and the the door. door. 'copperfield,' 'copperfield,' he he said, said, 'there 'there must must be be two two parties parties to to a a quarrel. quarrel. i i won't won't be be one.' one.' 'you may may go go to to the the devil!' devil!' said said i. i. 'don't 'don't say say that!' that!' he he replied. replied. 'i 'i know know you'll you'll be be sorry sorry afterwards. afterwards. how how can can you make make yourself yourself so so inferior inferior to to me, me, as as to to show show such such a a bad bad spirit? spirit? but but i i forgive forgive you.' 'you forgive forgive me!' me!' i i repeated repeated disdainfully. disdainfully. 'i 'i do, do, and and you can't can't help help yourself,' yourself,' replied replied uriah. uriah. 'to 'to think think of of your your going going and and attacking attacking me, me, that that have have always always been been a a friend friend to to you! but but there there can't can't be be a a quarrel quarrel without without two two parties, parties, and and i i won't won't be be one. one. i i will will be be a a friend friend to to you, in in spite spite of of you. so so now now you know know what what you've you've got got to to expect.' expect.' the the necessity necessity of of carrying carrying on on this this dialogue dialogue (his (his part part in in which which was was very very slow; slow; mine mine very very quick) quick) in in a a low low tone, tone, that that the the house house might might not not be be disturbed disturbed at at an an unseasonable unseasonable hour, hour, did did not not improve improve my my temper; temper; though though my my passion passion was was cooling cooling down. down. merely merely telling telling him him that that i i should should expect expect from from him him what what i i always always had had expected, expected, and and had had never never yet yet been been disappointed disappointed in, in, i i opened opened the the door door upon upon him, him, as as if if he he had had been been a a great great walnut walnut put put there there to to be be cracked, cracked, and and went went out out of of the the house. house. but but he he slept slept out out of of the the house house too, too, at at his his mother's mother's lodging; lodging; and and before before i i had had gone gone many many hundred hundred yards, yards, came came up up with with me. me. 'you know, know, copperfield,' copperfield,' he he said, said, in in my my ear ear (i (i did did not not turn turn my my head), head), 'you're 'you're in in quite quite a a wrong wrong position'; position'; which which i i felt felt to to be be true, true, and and that that made made me me chafe chafe the the more; more; 'you can't can't make make this this a a brave brave thing, thing, and and you can't can't help help being being forgiven. forgiven. i i don't don't intend intend to to mention mention it it to to mother, mother, nor nor to to any any living living soul. soul. i'm i'm determined determined to to forgive forgive you. but but i i do do wonder wonder that that you should should lift lift your your hand hand against against a a person person that that you knew knew to to be be so so umble!' umble!' i i felt felt only only less less mean mean than than he. he. he he knew knew me me better better than than i i knew knew myself. myself. if if he he had had retorted retorted or or openly openly exasperated exasperated me, me, it it would would have have been been a a relief relief and and a a justification; justification; but but he he had had put put me me on on a a slow slow fire, fire, on on which which i i lay lay tormented tormented half half the the night. night. in in the the morning, morning, when when i i came came out, out, the the early early church-bell church-bell was was ringing, ringing, and and he he was was walking walking up up and and down down with with his his mother. mother. he he addressed addressed me me as as if if nothing nothing had had happened, happened, and and i i could could do do no no less less than than reply. reply. i i had had struck struck him him hard hard enough enough to to give give him him the the toothache, toothache, i i suppose. suppose. at at all all events events his his face face was was tied tied up up in in a a black black silk silk handkerchief, handkerchief, which, which, with with his his hat hat perched perched on on the the top top of of it, it, was was far far from from improving improving his his appearance. appearance. i i heard heard that that he he went went to to a a dentist's dentist's in in london london on on the the monday monday morning, morning, and and had had a a tooth tooth out. out. i i hope hope it it was was a a double double one. one. the the doctor doctor gave gave out out that that he he was was not not quite quite well; well; and and remained remained alone, alone, for for a a considerable considerable part part of of every every day, day, during during the the remainder remainder of of the the visit. visit. agnes agnes and and her her father father had had been been gone gone a a week, week, before before we we resumed resumed our our usual usual work. work. on on the the day day preceding preceding its its resumption, resumption, the the doctor doctor gave gave me me with with his his own own hands hands a a folded folded note note not not sealed. sealed. it it was was addressed addressed to to myself; myself; and and laid laid an an injunction injunction on on me, me, in in a a few few affectionate affectionate words, words, never never to to refer refer to to the the subject subject of of that that evening. evening. i i had had confided confided it it to to my my aunt, aunt, but but to to no no one one else. else. it it was was not not a a subject subject i i could could discuss discuss with with agnes, agnes, and and agnes agnes certainly certainly had had not not the the least least suspicion suspicion of of what what had had passed. passed. neither, neither, i i felt felt convinced, convinced, had had mrs. mrs. strong strong then. then. several several weeks weeks elapsed elapsed before before i i saw saw the the least least change change in in her. her. it it came came on on slowly, slowly, like like a a cloud cloud when when there there is is no no wind. wind. at at first, first, she she seemed seemed to to wonder wonder at at the the gentle gentle compassion compassion with with which which the the doctor doctor spoke spoke to to her, her, and and at at his his wish wish that that she she should should have have her her mother mother with with her, her, to to relieve relieve the the dull dull monotony monotony of of her her life. life. often, often, when when we we were were at at work, work, and and she she was was sitting sitting by, by, i i would would see see her her pausing pausing and and looking looking at at him him with with that that memorable memorable face. face. afterwards, afterwards, i i sometimes sometimes observed observed her her rise, rise, with with her her eyes eyes full full of of tears, tears, and and go go out out of of the the room. room. gradually, gradually, an an unhappy unhappy shadow shadow fell fell upon upon her her beauty, beauty, and and deepened deepened every every day. day. mrs. mrs. markleham markleham was was a a regular regular inmate inmate of of the the cottage cottage then; then; but but she she talked talked and and talked, talked, and and saw saw nothing. nothing. as as this this change change stole stole on on annie, annie, once once like like sunshine sunshine in in the the doctor's doctor's house, house, the the doctor doctor became became older older in in appearance, appearance, and and more more grave; grave; but but the the sweetness sweetness of of his his temper, temper, the the placid placid kindness kindness of of his his manner, manner, and and his his benevolent benevolent solicitude solicitude for for her, her, if if they they were were capable capable of of any any increase, increase, were were increased. increased. i i saw saw him him once, once, early early on on the the morning morning of of her her birthday, birthday, when when she she came came to to sit sit in in the the window window while while we we were were at at work work (which (which she she had had always always done, done, but but now now began began to to do do with with a a timid timid and and uncertain uncertain air air that that i i thought thought very very touching), touching), take take her her forehead forehead between between his his hands, hands, kiss kiss it, it, and and go go hurriedly hurriedly away, away, too too much much moved moved to to remain. remain. i i saw saw her her stand stand where where he he had had left left her, her, like like a a statue; statue; and and then then bend bend down down her her head, head, and and clasp clasp her her hands, hands, and and weep, weep, i i cannot cannot say say how how sorrowfully. sorrowfully. sometimes, sometimes, after after that, that, i i fancied fancied that that she she tried tried to to speak speak even even to to me, me, in in intervals intervals when when we we were were left left alone. alone. but but she she never never uttered uttered a a word. word. the the doctor doctor always always had had some some new new project project for for her her participating participating in in amusements amusements away away from from home, home, with with her her mother; mother; and and mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, who who was was very very fond fond of of amusements, amusements, and and very very easily easily dissatisfied dissatisfied with with anything anything else, else, entered entered into into them them with with great great good-will, good-will, and and was was loud loud in in her her commendations. commendations. but but annie, annie, in in a a spiritless spiritless unhappy unhappy way, way, only only went went whither whither she she was was led, led, and and seemed seemed to to have have no no care care for for anything. anything. i i did did not not know know what what to to think. think. neither neither did did my my aunt; aunt; who who must must have have walked, walked, at at various various times, times, a a hundred hundred miles miles in in her her uncertainty. uncertainty. what what was was strangest strangest of of all all was, was, that that the the only only real real relief relief which which seemed seemed to to make make its its way way into into the the secret secret region region of of this this domestic domestic unhappiness, unhappiness, made made its its way way there there in in the the person person of of mr. mr. dick. dick. what what his his thoughts thoughts were were on on the the subject, subject, or or what what his his observation observation was, was, i i am am as as unable unable to to explain, explain, as as i i dare dare say say he he would would have have been been to to assist assist me me in in the the task. task. but, but, as as i i have have recorded recorded in in the the narrative narrative of of my my school school days, days, his his veneration veneration for for the the doctor doctor was was unbounded; unbounded; and and there there is is a a subtlety subtlety of of perception perception in in real real attachment, attachment, even even when when it it is is borne borne towards towards man man by by one one of of the the lower lower animals, animals, which which leaves leaves the the highest highest intellect intellect behind. behind. to to this this mind mind of of the the heart, heart, if if i i may may call call it it so, so, in in mr. mr. dick, dick, some some bright bright ray ray of of the the truth truth shot shot straight. straight. he he had had proudly proudly resumed resumed his his privilege, privilege, in in many many of of his his spare spare hours, hours, of of walking walking up up and and down down the the garden garden with with the the doctor; doctor; as as he he had had been been accustomed accustomed to to pace pace up up and and down down the the doctor's doctor's walk walk at at canterbury. canterbury. but but matters matters were were no no sooner sooner in in this this state, state, than than he he devoted devoted all all his his spare spare time time (and (and got got up up earlier earlier to to make make it it more) more) to to these these perambulations. perambulations. if if he he had had never never been been so so happy happy as as when when the the doctor doctor read read that that marvellous marvellous performance, performance, the the dictionary, dictionary, to to him; him; he he was was now now quite quite miserable miserable unless unless the the doctor doctor pulled pulled it it out out of of his his pocket, pocket, and and began. began. when when the the doctor doctor and and i i were were engaged, engaged, he he now now fell fell into into the the custom custom of of walking walking up up and and down down with with mrs. mrs. strong, strong, and and helping helping her her to to trim trim her her favourite favourite flowers, flowers, or or weed weed the the beds. beds. i i dare dare say say he he rarely rarely spoke spoke a a dozen dozen words words in in an an hour: hour: but but his his quiet quiet interest, interest, and and his his wistful wistful face, face, found found immediate immediate response response in in both both their their breasts; breasts; each each knew knew that that the the other other liked liked him, him, and and that that he he loved loved both; both; and and he he became became what what no no one one else else could could be be -- -- a a link link between between them. them. when when i i think think of of him, him, with with his his impenetrably impenetrably wise wise face, face, walking walking up up and and down down with with the the doctor, doctor, delighted delighted to to be be battered battered by by the the hard hard words words in in the the dictionary; dictionary; when when i i think think of of him him carrying carrying huge huge watering-pots watering-pots after after annie; annie; kneeling kneeling down, down, in in very very paws paws of of gloves, gloves, at at patient patient microscopic microscopic work work among among the the little little leaves; leaves; expressing expressing as as no no philosopher philosopher could could have have expressed, expressed, in in everything everything he he did, did, a a delicate delicate desire desire to to be be her her friend; friend; showering showering sympathy, sympathy, trustfulness, trustfulness, and and affection, affection, out out of of every every hole hole in in the the watering-pot; watering-pot; when when i i think think of of him him never never wandering wandering in in that that better better mind mind of of his his to to which which unhappiness unhappiness addressed addressed itself, itself, never never bringing bringing the the unfortunate unfortunate king king charles charles into into the the garden, garden, never never wavering wavering in in his his grateful grateful service, service, never never diverted diverted from from his his knowledge knowledge that that there there was was something something wrong, wrong, or or from from his his wish wish to to set set it it right right -- -- i i really really feel feel almost almost ashamed ashamed of of having having known known that that he he was was not not quite quite in in his his wits, wits, taking taking account account of of the the utmost utmost i i have have done done with with mine. mine. 'nobody 'nobody but but myself, myself, trot, trot, knows knows what what that that man man is!' is!' my my aunt aunt would would proudly proudly remark, remark, when when we we conversed conversed about about it. it. 'dick 'dick will will distinguish distinguish himself himself yet!' yet!' i i must must refer refer to to one one other other topic topic before before i i close close this this chapter. chapter. while while the the visit visit at at the the doctor's doctor's was was still still in in progress, progress, i i observed observed that that the the postman postman brought brought two two or or three three letters letters every every morning morning for for uriah uriah heep, heep, who who remained remained at at highgate highgate until until the the rest rest went went back, back, it it being being a a leisure leisure time; time; and and that that these these were were always always directed directed in in a a business-like business-like manner manner by by mr. mr. micawber, micawber, who who now now assumed assumed a a round round legal legal hand. hand. i i was was glad glad to to infer, infer, from from these these slight slight premises, premises, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber was was doing doing well; well; and and consequently consequently was was much much surprised surprised to to receive, receive, about about this this time, time, the the following following letter letter from from his his amiable amiable wife. wife. 'canterbury, 'canterbury, monday monday evening. evening. 'you will will doubtless doubtless be be surprised, surprised, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, to to receive receive this this communication. communication. still still more more so, so, by by its its contents. contents. still still more more so, so, by by the the stipulation stipulation of of implicit implicit confidence confidence which which i i beg beg to to impose. impose. but but my my feelings feelings as as a a wife wife and and mother mother require require relief; relief; and and as as i i do do not not wish wish to to consult consult my my family family (already (already obnoxious obnoxious to to the the feelings feelings of of mr. mr. micawber), micawber), i i know know no no one one of of whom whom i i can can better better ask ask advice advice than than my my friend friend and and former former lodger. lodger. 'you may may be be aware, aware, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, that that between between myself myself and and mr. mr. micawber micawber (whom (whom i i will will never never desert), desert), there there has has always always been been preserved preserved a a spirit spirit of of mutual mutual confidence. confidence. mr. mr. micawber micawber may may have have occasionally occasionally given given a a bill bill without without consulting consulting me, me, or or he he may may have have misled misled me me as as to to the the period period when when that that obligation obligation would would become become due. due. this this has has actually actually happened. happened. but, but, in in general, general, mr. mr. micawber micawber has has had had no no secrets secrets from from the the bosom bosom of of affection affection -- -- i i allude allude to to his his wife wife -- -- and and has has invariably, invariably, on on our our retirement retirement to to rest, rest, recalled recalled the the events events of of the the day. day. 'you will will picture picture to to yourself, yourself, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, what what the the poignancy poignancy of of my my feelings feelings must must be, be, when when i i inform inform you that that mr. mr. micawber micawber is is entirely entirely changed. changed. he he is is reserved. reserved. he he is is secret. secret. his his life life is is a a mystery mystery to to the the partner partner of of his his joys joys and and sorrows sorrows -- -- i i again again allude allude to to his his wife wife -- -- and and if if i i should should assure assure you that that beyond beyond knowing knowing that that it it is is passed passed from from morning morning to to night night at at the the office, office, i i now now know know less less of of it it than than i i do do of of the the man man in in the the south, south, connected connected with with whose whose mouth mouth the the thoughtless thoughtless children children repeat repeat an an idle idle tale tale respecting respecting cold cold plum plum porridge, porridge, i i should should adopt adopt a a popular popular fallacy fallacy to to express express an an actual actual fact. fact. 'but 'but this this is is not not all. all. mr. mr. micawber micawber is is morose. morose. he he is is severe. severe. he he is is estranged estranged from from our our eldest eldest son son and and daughter, daughter, he he has has no no pride pride in in his his twins, twins, he he looks looks with with an an eye eye of of coldness coldness even even on on the the unoffending unoffending stranger stranger who who last last became became a a member member of of our our circle. circle. the the pecuniary pecuniary means means of of meeting meeting our our expenses, expenses, kept kept down down to to the the utmost utmost farthing, farthing, are are obtained obtained from from him him with with great great difficulty, difficulty, and and even even under under fearful fearful threats threats that that he he will will settle settle himself himself (the (the exact exact expression); expression); and and he he inexorably inexorably refuses refuses to to give give any any explanation explanation whatever whatever of of this this distracting distracting policy. policy. 'this 'this is is hard hard to to bear. bear. this this is is heart-breaking. heart-breaking. if if you will will advise advise me, me, knowing knowing my my feeble feeble powers powers such such as as they they are, are, how how you think think it it will will be be best best to to exert exert them them in in a a dilemma dilemma so so unwonted, unwonted, you will will add add another another friendly friendly obligation obligation to to the the many many you have have already already rendered rendered me. me. with with loves loves from from the the children, children, and and a a smile smile from from the the happily-unconscious happily-unconscious stranger, stranger, i i remain, remain, dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, your your afflicted, afflicted, 'emma 'emma micawber.' micawber.' i i did did not not feel feel justified justified in in giving giving a a wife wife of of mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's experience experience any any other other recommendation, recommendation, than than that that she she should should try try to to reclaim reclaim mr. mr. micawber micawber by by patience patience and and kindness kindness (as (as i i knew knew she she would would in in any any case); case); but but the the letter letter set set me me thinking thinking about about him him very very much. much. chapter chapter 43. 43. another another retrospect retrospect once once again, again, let let me me pause pause upon upon a a memorable memorable period period of of my my life. life. let let me me stand stand aside, aside, to to see see the the phantoms phantoms of of those those days days go go by by me, me, accompanying accompanying the the shadow shadow of of myself, myself, in in dim dim procession. procession. weeks, weeks, months, months, seasons, seasons, pass pass along. along. they they seem seem little little more more than than a a summer summer day day and and a a winter winter evening. evening. now, now, the the common common where where i i walk walk with with dora dora is is all all in in bloom, bloom, a a field field of of bright bright gold; gold; and and now now the the unseen unseen heather heather lies lies in in mounds mounds and and bunches bunches underneath underneath a a covering covering of of snow. snow. in in a a breath, breath, the the river river that that flows flows through through our our sunday sunday walks walks is is sparkling sparkling in in the the summer summer sun, sun, is is ruffled ruffled by by the the winter winter wind, wind, or or thickened thickened with with drifting drifting heaps heaps of of ice. ice. faster faster than than ever ever river river ran ran towards towards the the sea, sea, it it flashes, flashes, darkens, darkens, and and rolls rolls away. away. not not a a thread thread changes, changes, in in the the house house of of the the two two little little bird-like bird-like ladies. ladies. the the clock clock ticks ticks over over the the fireplace, fireplace, the the weather-glass weather-glass hangs hangs in in the the hall. hall. neither neither clock clock nor nor weather-glass weather-glass is is ever ever right; right; but but we we believe believe in in both, both, devoutly. devoutly. i i have have come come legally legally to to man's man's estate. estate. i i have have attained attained the the dignity dignity of of twenty-one. twenty-one. but but this this is is a a sort sort of of dignity dignity that that may may be be thrust thrust upon upon one. one. let let me me think think what what i i have have achieved. achieved. i i have have tamed tamed that that savage savage stenographic stenographic mystery. mystery. i i make make a a respectable respectable income income by by it. it. i i am am in in high high repute repute for for my my accomplishment accomplishment in in all all pertaining pertaining to to the the art, art, and and am am joined joined with with eleven eleven others others in in reporting reporting the the debates debates in in parliament parliament for for a a morning morning newspaper. newspaper. night night after after night, night, i i record record predictions predictions that that never never come come to to pass, pass, professions professions that that are are never never fulfilled, fulfilled, explanations explanations that that are are only only meant meant to to mystify. mystify. i i wallow wallow in in words. words. britannia, britannia, that that unfortunate unfortunate female, female, is is always always before before me, me, like like a a trussed trussed fowl: fowl: skewered skewered through through and and through through with with office-pens, office-pens, and and bound bound hand hand and and foot foot with with red red tape. tape. i i am am sufficiently sufficiently behind behind the the scenes scenes to to know know the the worth worth of of political political life. life. i i am am quite quite an an infidel infidel about about it, it, and and shall shall never never be be converted. converted. my my dear dear old old traddles traddles has has tried tried his his hand hand at at the the same same pursuit, pursuit, but but it it is is not not in in traddles's traddles's way. way. he he is is perfectly perfectly good-humoured good-humoured respecting respecting his his failure, failure, and and reminds reminds me me that that he he always always did did consider consider himself himself slow. slow. he he has has occasional occasional employment employment on on the the same same newspaper, newspaper, in in getting getting up up the the facts facts of of dry dry subjects, subjects, to to be be written written about about and and embellished embellished by by more more fertile fertile minds. minds. he he is is called called to to the the bar; bar; and and with with admirable admirable industry industry and and self-denial self-denial has has scraped scraped another another hundred hundred pounds pounds together, together, to to fee fee a a conveyancer conveyancer whose whose chambers chambers he he attends. attends. a a great great deal deal of of very very hot hot port port wine wine was was consumed consumed at at his his call; call; and, and, considering considering the the figure, figure, i i should should think think the the inner inner temple temple must must have have made made a a profit profit by by it. it. i i have have come come out out in in another another way. way. i i have have taken taken with with fear fear and and trembling trembling to to authorship. authorship. i i wrote wrote a a little little something, something, in in secret, secret, and and sent sent it it to to a a magazine, magazine, and and it it was was published published in in the the magazine. magazine. since since then, then, i i have have taken taken heart heart to to write write a a good good many many trifling trifling pieces. pieces. now, now, i i am am regularly regularly paid paid for for them. them. altogether, altogether, i i am am well well off, off, when when i i tell tell my my income income on on the the fingers fingers of of my my left left hand, hand, i i pass pass the the third third finger finger and and take take in in the the fourth fourth to to the the middle middle joint. joint. we we have have removed, removed, from from buckingham buckingham street, street, to to a a pleasant pleasant little little cottage cottage very very near near the the one one i i looked looked at, at, when when my my enthusiasm enthusiasm first first came came on. on. my my aunt, aunt, however however (who (who has has sold sold the the house house at at dover, dover, to to good good advantage), advantage), is is not not going going to to remain remain here, here, but but intends intends removing removing herself herself to to a a still still more more tiny tiny cottage cottage close close at at hand. hand. what what does does this this portend? portend? my my marriage? marriage? yes! yes! yes! yes! i i am am going going to to be be married married to to dora! dora! miss miss lavinia lavinia and and miss miss clarissa clarissa have have given given their their consent; consent; and and if if ever ever canary canary birds birds were were in in a a flutter, flutter, they they are. are. miss miss lavinia, lavinia, self-charged self-charged with with the the superintendence superintendence of of my my darling's darling's wardrobe, wardrobe, is is constantly constantly cutting cutting out out brown-paper brown-paper cuirasses, cuirasses, and and differing differing in in opinion opinion from from a a highly highly respectable respectable young young man, man, with with a a long long bundle, bundle, and and a a yard yard measure measure under under his his arm. arm. a a dressmaker, dressmaker, always always stabbed stabbed in in the the breast breast with with a a needle needle and and thread, thread, boards boards and and lodges lodges in in the the house; house; and and seems seems to to me, me, eating, eating, drinking, drinking, or or sleeping, sleeping, never never to to take take her her thimble thimble off. off. they they make make a a lay-figure lay-figure of of my my dear. dear. they they are are always always sending sending for for her her to to come come and and try try something something on. on. we we can't can't be be happy happy together together for for five five minutes minutes in in the the evening, evening, but but some some intrusive intrusive female female knocks knocks at at the the door, door, and and says, says, 'oh, 'oh, if if you please, please, miss miss dora, dora, would would you step step upstairs!' upstairs!' miss miss clarissa clarissa and and my my aunt aunt roam roam all all over over london, london, to to find find out out articles articles of of furniture furniture for for dora dora and and me me to to look look at. at. it it would would be be better better for for them them to to buy buy the the goods goods at at once, once, without without this this ceremony ceremony of of inspection; inspection; for, for, when when we we go go to to see see a a kitchen kitchen fender fender and and meat-screen, meat-screen, dora dora sees sees a a chinese chinese house house for for jip, jip, with with little little bells bells on on the the top, top, and and prefers prefers that. that. and and it it takes takes a a long long time time to to accustom accustom jip jip to to his his new new residence, residence, after after we we have have bought bought it; it; whenever whenever he he goes goes in in or or out, out, he he makes makes all all the the little little bells bells ring, ring, and and is is horribly horribly frightened. frightened. peggotty peggotty comes comes up up to to make make herself herself useful, useful, and and falls falls to to work work immediately. immediately. her her department department appears appears to to be, be, to to clean clean everything everything over over and and over over again. again. she she rubs rubs everything everything that that can can be be rubbed, rubbed, until until it it shines, shines, like like her her own own honest honest forehead, forehead, with with perpetual perpetual friction. friction. and and now now it it is, is, that that i i begin begin to to see see her her solitary solitary brother brother passing passing through through the the dark dark streets streets at at night, night, and and looking, looking, as as he he goes, goes, among among the the wandering wandering faces. faces. i i never never speak speak to to him him at at such such an an hour. hour. i i know know too too well, well, as as his his grave grave figure figure passes passes onward, onward, what what he he seeks, seeks, and and what what he he dreads. dreads. why why does does traddles traddles look look so so important important when when he he calls calls upon upon me me this this afternoon afternoon in in the the commons commons -- -- where where i i still still occasionally occasionally attend, attend, for for form's form's sake, sake, when when i i have have time? time? the the realization realization of of my my boyish boyish day-dreams day-dreams is is at at hand. hand. i i am am going going to to take take out out the the licence. licence. it it is is a a little little document document to to do do so so much; much; and and traddles traddles contemplates contemplates it, it, as as it it lies lies upon upon my my desk, desk, half half in in admiration, admiration, half half in in awe. awe. there there are are the the names, names, in in the the sweet sweet old old visionary visionary connexion, connexion, david david copperfield copperfield and and dora dora spenlow; spenlow; and and there, there, in in the the corner, corner, is is that that parental parental institution, institution, the the stamp stamp office, office, which which is is so so benignantly benignantly interested interested in in the the various various transactions transactions of of human human life, life, looking looking down down upon upon our our union; union; and and there there is is the the archbishop archbishop of of canterbury canterbury invoking invoking a a blessing blessing on on us us in in print, print, and and doing doing it it as as cheap cheap as as could could possibly possibly be be expected. expected. nevertheless, nevertheless, i i am am in in a a dream, dream, a a flustered, flustered, happy, happy, hurried hurried dream. dream. i i can't can't believe believe that that it it is is going going to to be; be; and and yet yet i i can't can't believe believe but but that that everyone everyone i i pass pass in in the the street, street, must must have have some some kind kind of of perception, perception, that that i i am am to to be be married married the the day day after after tomorrow. tomorrow. the the surrogate surrogate knows knows me, me, when when i i go go down down to to be be sworn; sworn; and and disposes disposes of of me me easily, easily, as as if if there there were were a a masonic masonic understanding understanding between between us. us. traddles traddles is is not not at at all all wanted, wanted, but but is is in in attendance attendance as as my my general general backer. backer. 'i 'i hope hope the the next next time time you come come here, here, my my dear dear fellow,' fellow,' i i say say to to traddles, traddles, 'it 'it will will be be on on the the same same errand errand for for yourself. yourself. and and i i hope hope it it will will be be soon.' soon.' 'thank 'thank you for for your your good good wishes, wishes, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' he he replies. replies. 'i 'i hope hope so so too. too. it's it's a a satisfaction satisfaction to to know know that that she'll she'll wait wait for for me me any any length length of of time, time, and and that that she she really really is is the the dearest dearest girl girl -- -- ' ' 'when 'when are are you to to meet meet her her at at the the coach?' coach?' i i ask. ask. 'at 'at seven,' seven,' says says traddles, traddles, looking looking at at his his plain plain old old silver silver watch watch -- -- the the very very watch watch he he once once took took a a wheel wheel out out of, of, at at school, school, to to make make a a water-mill. water-mill. 'that 'that is is about about miss miss wickfield's wickfield's time, time, is is it it not?' not?' 'a 'a little little earlier. earlier. her her time time is is half half past past eight.' eight.' 'i 'i assure assure you, my my dear dear boy,' boy,' says says traddles, traddles, 'i 'i am am almost almost as as pleased pleased as as if if i i were were going going to to be be married married myself, myself, to to think think that that this this event event is is coming coming to to such such a a happy happy termination. termination. and and really really the the great great friendship friendship and and consideration consideration of of personally personally associating associating sophy sophy with with the the joyful joyful occasion, occasion, and and inviting inviting her her to to be be a a bridesmaid bridesmaid in in conjunction conjunction with with miss miss wickfield, wickfield, demands demands my my warmest warmest thanks. thanks. i i am am extremely extremely sensible sensible of of it.' it.' i i hear hear him, him, and and shake shake hands hands with with him; him; and and we we talk, talk, and and walk, walk, and and dine, dine, and and so so on; on; but but i i don't don't believe believe it. it. nothing nothing is is real. real. sophy sophy arrives arrives at at the the house house of of dora's dora's aunts, aunts, in in due due course. course. she she has has the the most most agreeable agreeable of of faces, faces, -- -- not not absolutely absolutely beautiful, beautiful, but but extraordinarily extraordinarily pleasant, pleasant, -- -- and and is is one one of of the the most most genial, genial, unaffected, unaffected, frank, frank, engaging engaging creatures creatures i i have have ever ever seen. seen. traddles traddles presents presents her her to to us us with with great great pride; pride; and and rubs rubs his his hands hands for for ten ten minutes minutes by by the the clock, clock, with with every every individual individual hair hair upon upon his his head head standing standing on on tiptoe, tiptoe, when when i i congratulate congratulate him him in in a a corner corner on on his his choice. choice. i i have have brought brought agnes agnes from from the the canterbury canterbury coach, coach, and and her her cheerful cheerful and and beautiful beautiful face face is is among among us us for for the the second second time. time. agnes agnes has has a a great great liking liking for for traddles, traddles, and and it it is is capital capital to to see see them them meet, meet, and and to to observe observe the the glory glory of of traddles traddles as as he he commends commends the the dearest dearest girl girl in in the the world world to to her her acquaintance. acquaintance. still still i i don't don't believe believe it. it. we we have have a a delightful delightful evening, evening, and and are are supremely supremely happy; happy; but but i i don't don't believe believe it it yet. yet. i i can't can't collect collect myself. myself. i i can't can't check check off off my my happiness happiness as as it it takes takes place. place. i i feel feel in in a a misty misty and and unsettled unsettled kind kind of of state; state; as as if if i i had had got got up up very very early early in in the the morning morning a a week week or or two two ago, ago, and and had had never never been been to to bed bed since. since. i i can't can't make make out out when when yesterday yesterday was. was. i i seem seem to to have have been been carrying carrying the the licence licence about, about, in in my my pocket, pocket, many many months. months. next next day, day, too, too, when when we we all all go go in in a a flock flock to to see see the the house house -- -- our our house house -- -- dora's dora's and and mine mine -- -- i i am am quite quite unable unable to to regard regard myself myself as as its its master. master. i i seem seem to to be be there, there, by by permission permission of of somebody somebody else. else. i i half half expect expect the the real real master master to to come come home home presently, presently, and and say say he he is is glad glad to to see see me. me. such such a a beautiful beautiful little little house house as as it it is, is, with with everything everything so so bright bright and and new; new; with with the the flowers flowers on on the the carpets carpets looking looking as as if if freshly freshly gathered, gathered, and and the the green green leaves leaves on on the the paper paper as as if if they they had had just just come come out; out; with with the the spotless spotless muslin muslin curtains, curtains, and and the the blushing blushing rose-coloured rose-coloured furniture, furniture, and and dora's dora's garden garden hat hat with with the the blue blue ribbon ribbon -- -- do do i i remember, remember, now, now, how how i i loved loved her her in in such such another another hat hat when when i i first first knew knew her! her! -- -- already already hanging hanging on on its its little little peg; peg; the the guitar-case guitar-case quite quite at at home home on on its its heels heels in in a a corner; corner; and and everybody everybody tumbling tumbling over over jip's jip's pagoda, pagoda, which which is is much much too too big big for for the the establishment. establishment. another another happy happy evening, evening, quite quite as as unreal unreal as as all all the the rest rest of of it, it, and and i i steal steal into into the the usual usual room room before before going going away. away. dora dora is is not not there. there. i i suppose suppose they they have have not not done done trying trying on on yet. yet. miss miss lavinia lavinia peeps peeps in, in, and and tells tells me me mysteriously mysteriously that that she she will will not not be be long. long. she she is is rather rather long, long, notwithstanding; notwithstanding; but but by by and and by by i i hear hear a a rustling rustling at at the the door, door, and and someone someone taps. taps. i i say, say, 'come 'come in!' in!' but but someone someone taps taps again. again. i i go go to to the the door, door, wondering wondering who who it it is; is; there, there, i i meet meet a a pair pair of of bright bright eyes, eyes, and and a a blushing blushing face; face; they they are are dora's dora's eyes eyes and and face, face, and and miss miss lavinia lavinia has has dressed dressed her her in in tomorrow's tomorrow's dress, dress, bonnet bonnet and and all, all, for for me me to to see. see. i i take take my my little little wife wife to to my my heart; heart; and and miss miss lavinia lavinia gives gives a a little little scream scream because because i i tumble tumble the the bonnet, bonnet, and and dora dora laughs laughs and and cries cries at at once, once, because because i i am am so so pleased; pleased; and and i i believe believe it it less less than than ever. ever. 'do 'do you think think it it pretty, pretty, doady?' doady?' says says dora. dora. pretty! pretty! i i should should rather rather think think i i did. did. 'and 'and are are you sure sure you like like me me very very much?' much?' says says dora. dora. the the topic topic is is fraught fraught with with such such danger danger to to the the bonnet, bonnet, that that miss miss lavinia lavinia gives gives another another little little scream, scream, and and begs begs me me to to understand understand that that dora dora is is only only to to be be looked looked at, at, and and on on no no account account to to be be touched. touched. so so dora dora stands stands in in a a delightful delightful state state of of confusion confusion for for a a minute minute or or two, two, to to be be admired; admired; and and then then takes takes off off her her bonnet bonnet -- -- looking looking so so natural natural without without it! it! -- -- and and runs runs away away with with it it in in her her hand; hand; and and comes comes dancing dancing down down again again in in her her own own familiar familiar dress, dress, and and asks asks jip jip if if i i have have got got a a beautiful beautiful little little wife, wife, and and whether whether he'll he'll forgive forgive her her for for being being married, married, and and kneels kneels down down to to make make him him stand stand upon upon the the cookery-book, cookery-book, for for the the last last time time in in her her single single life. life. i i go go home, home, more more incredulous incredulous than than ever, ever, to to a a lodging lodging that that i i have have hard hard by; by; and and get get up up very very early early in in the the morning, morning, to to ride ride to to the the highgate highgate road road and and fetch fetch my my aunt. aunt. i i have have never never seen seen my my aunt aunt in in such such state. state. she she is is dressed dressed in in lavender-coloured lavender-coloured silk, silk, and and has has a a white white bonnet bonnet on, on, and and is is amazing. amazing. janet janet has has dressed dressed her, her, and and is is there there to to look look at at me. me. peggotty peggotty is is ready ready to to go go to to church, church, intending intending to to behold behold the the ceremony ceremony from from the the gallery. gallery. mr. mr. dick, dick, who who is is to to give give my my darling darling to to me me at at the the altar, altar, has has had had his his hair hair curled. curled. traddles, traddles, whom whom i i have have taken taken up up by by appointment appointment at at the the turnpike, turnpike, presents presents a a dazzling dazzling combination combination of of cream cream colour colour and and light light blue; blue; and and both both he he and and mr. mr. dick dick have have a a general general effect effect about about them them of of being being all all gloves. gloves. no no doubt doubt i i see see this, this, because because i i know know it it is is so; so; but but i i am am astray, astray, and and seem seem to to see see nothing. nothing. nor nor do do i i believe believe anything anything whatever. whatever. still, still, as as we we drive drive along along in in an an open open carriage, carriage, this this fairy fairy marriage marriage is is real real enough enough to to fill fill me me with with a a sort sort of of wondering wondering pity pity for for the the unfortunate unfortunate people people who who have have no no part part in in it, it, but but are are sweeping sweeping out out the the shops, shops, and and going going to to their their daily daily occupations. occupations. my my aunt aunt sits sits with with my my hand hand in in hers hers all all the the way. way. when when we we stop stop a a little little way way short short of of the the church, church, to to put put down down peggotty, peggotty, whom whom we we have have brought brought on on the the box, box, she she gives gives it it a a squeeze, squeeze, and and me me a a kiss. kiss. 'god 'god bless bless you, trot! trot! my my own own boy boy never never could could be be dearer. dearer. i i think think of of poor poor dear dear baby baby this this morning.' morning.' 'so 'so do do i. i. and and of of all all i i owe owe to to you, dear dear aunt.' aunt.' 'tut, 'tut, child!' child!' says says my my aunt; aunt; and and gives gives her her hand hand in in overflowing overflowing cordiality cordiality to to traddles, traddles, who who then then gives gives his his to to mr. mr. dick, dick, who who then then gives gives his his to to me, me, who who then then gives gives mine mine to to traddles, traddles, and and then then we we come come to to the the church church door. door. the the church church is is calm calm enough, enough, i i am am sure; sure; but but it it might might be be a a steam-power steam-power loom loom in in full full action, action, for for any any sedative sedative effect effect it it has has on on me. me. i i am am too too far far gone gone for for that. that. the the rest rest is is all all a a more more or or less less incoherent incoherent dream. dream. a a dream dream of of their their coming coming in in with with dora; dora; of of the the pew-opener pew-opener arranging arranging us, us, like like a a drill-sergeant, drill-sergeant, before before the the altar altar rails; rails; of of my my wondering, wondering, even even then, then, why why pew-openers pew-openers must must always always be be the the most most disagreeable disagreeable females females procurable, procurable, and and whether whether there there is is any any religious religious dread dread of of a a disastrous disastrous infection infection of of good-humour good-humour which which renders renders it it indispensable indispensable to to set set those those vessels vessels of of vinegar vinegar upon upon the the road road to to heaven. heaven. of of the the clergyman clergyman and and clerk clerk appearing; appearing; of of a a few few boatmen boatmen and and some some other other people people strolling strolling in; in; of of an an ancient ancient mariner mariner behind behind me, me, strongly strongly flavouring flavouring the the church church with with rum; rum; of of the the service service beginning beginning in in a a deep deep voice, voice, and and our our all all being being very very attentive. attentive. of of miss miss lavinia, lavinia, who who acts acts as as a a semi-auxiliary semi-auxiliary bridesmaid, bridesmaid, being being the the first first to to cry, cry, and and of of her her doing doing homage homage (as (as i i take take it) it) to to the the memory memory of of pidger, pidger, in in sobs; sobs; of of miss miss clarissa clarissa applying applying a a smelling-bottle; smelling-bottle; of of agnes agnes taking taking care care of of dora; dora; of of my my aunt aunt endeavouring endeavouring to to represent represent herself herself as as a a model model of of sternness, sternness, with with tears tears rolling rolling down down her her face; face; of of little little dora dora trembling trembling very very much, much, and and making making her her responses responses in in faint faint whispers. whispers. of of our our kneeling kneeling down down together, together, side side by by side; side; of of dora's dora's trembling trembling less less and and less, less, but but always always clasping clasping agnes agnes by by the the hand; hand; of of the the service service being being got got through, through, quietly quietly and and gravely; gravely; of of our our all all looking looking at at each each other other in in an an april april state state of of smiles smiles and and tears, tears, when when it it is is over; over; of of my my young young wife wife being being hysterical hysterical in in the the vestry, vestry, and and crying crying for for her her poor poor papa, papa, her her dear dear papa. papa. of of her her soon soon cheering cheering up up again, again, and and our our signing signing the the register register all all round. round. of of my my going going into into the the gallery gallery for for peggotty peggotty to to bring bring her her to to sign sign it; it; of of peggotty's peggotty's hugging hugging me me in in a a corner, corner, and and telling telling me me she she saw saw my my own own dear dear mother mother married; married; of of its its being being over, over, and and our our going going away. away. of of my my walking walking so so proudly proudly and and lovingly lovingly down down the the aisle aisle with with my my sweet sweet wife wife upon upon my my arm, arm, through through a a mist mist of of half-seen half-seen people, people, pulpits, pulpits, monuments, monuments, pews, pews, fonts, fonts, organs, organs, and and church church windows, windows, in in which which there there flutter flutter faint faint airs airs of of association association with with my my childish childish church church at at home, home, so so long long ago. ago. of of their their whispering, whispering, as as we we pass, pass, what what a a youthful youthful couple couple we we are, are, and and what what a a pretty pretty little little wife wife she she is. is. of of our our all all being being so so merry merry and and talkative talkative in in the the carriage carriage going going back. back. of of sophy sophy telling telling us us that that when when she she saw saw traddles traddles (whom (whom i i had had entrusted entrusted with with the the licence) licence) asked asked for for it, it, she she almost almost fainted, fainted, having having been been convinced convinced that that he he would would contrive contrive to to lose lose it, it, or or to to have have his his pocket pocket picked. picked. of of agnes agnes laughing laughing gaily; gaily; and and of of dora dora being being so so fond fond of of agnes agnes that that she she will will not not be be separated separated from from her, her, but but still still keeps keeps her her hand. hand. of of there there being being a a breakfast, breakfast, with with abundance abundance of of things, things, pretty pretty and and substantial, substantial, to to eat eat and and drink, drink, whereof whereof i i partake, partake, as as i i should should do do in in any any other other dream, dream, without without the the least least perception perception of of their their flavour; flavour; eating eating and and drinking, drinking, as as i i may may say, say, nothing nothing but but love love and and marriage, marriage, and and no no more more believing believing in in the the viands viands than than in in anything anything else. else. of of my my making making a a speech speech in in the the same same dreamy dreamy fashion, fashion, without without having having an an idea idea of of what what i i want want to to say, say, beyond beyond such such as as may may be be comprehended comprehended in in the the full full conviction conviction that that i i haven't haven't said said it. it. of of our our being being very very sociably sociably and and simply simply happy happy (always (always in in a a dream dream though); though); and and of of jip's jip's having having wedding wedding cake, cake, and and its its not not agreeing agreeing with with him him afterwards. afterwards. of of the the pair pair of of hired hired post-horses post-horses being being ready, ready, and and of of dora's dora's going going away away to to change change her her dress. dress. of of my my aunt aunt and and miss miss clarissa clarissa remaining remaining with with us; us; and and our our walking walking in in the the garden; garden; and and my my aunt, aunt, who who has has made made quite quite a a speech speech at at breakfast breakfast touching touching dora's dora's aunts, aunts, being being mightily mightily amused amused with with herself, herself, but but a a little little proud proud of of it it too. too. of of dora's dora's being being ready, ready, and and of of miss miss lavinia's lavinia's hovering hovering about about her, her, loth loth to to lose lose the the pretty pretty toy toy that that has has given given her her so so much much pleasant pleasant occupation. occupation. of of dora's dora's making making a a long long series series of of surprised surprised discoveries discoveries that that she she has has forgotten forgotten all all sorts sorts of of little little things; things; and and of of everybody's everybody's running running everywhere everywhere to to fetch fetch them. them. of of their their all all closing closing about about dora, dora, when when at at last last she she begins begins to to say say good-bye, good-bye, looking, looking, with with their their bright bright colours colours and and ribbons, ribbons, like like a a bed bed of of flowers. flowers. of of my my darling darling being being almost almost smothered smothered among among the the flowers, flowers, and and coming coming out, out, laughing laughing and and crying crying both both together, together, to to my my jealous jealous arms. arms. of of my my wanting wanting to to carry carry jip jip (who (who is is to to go go along along with with us), us), and and dora's dora's saying saying no, no, that that she she must must carry carry him, him, or or else else he'll he'll think think she she don't don't like like him him any any more, more, now now she she is is married, married, and and will will break break his his heart. heart. of of our our going, going, arm arm in in arm, arm, and and dora dora stopping stopping and and looking looking back, back, and and saying, saying, 'if 'if i i have have ever ever been been cross cross or or ungrateful ungrateful to to anybody, anybody, don't don't remember remember it!' it!' and and bursting bursting into into tears. tears. of of her her waving waving her her little little hand, hand, and and our our going going away away once once more. more. of of her her once once more more stopping, stopping, and and looking looking back, back, and and hurrying hurrying to to agnes, agnes, and and giving giving agnes, agnes, above above all all the the others, others, her her last last kisses kisses and and farewells. farewells. we we drive drive away away together, together, and and i i awake awake from from the the dream. dream. i i believe believe it it at at last. last. it it is is my my dear, dear, dear, dear, little little wife wife beside beside me, me, whom whom i i love love so so well! well! 'are 'are you happy happy now, now, you foolish foolish boy?' boy?' says says dora, dora, 'and 'and sure sure you don't don't repent?' repent?' i i have have stood stood aside aside to to see see the the phantoms phantoms of of those those days days go go by by me. me. they they are are gone, gone, and and i i resume resume the the journey journey of of my my story. story. chapter chapter 44. 44. our our housekeeping housekeeping it it was was a a strange strange condition condition of of things, things, the the honeymoon honeymoon being being over, over, and and the the bridesmaids bridesmaids gone gone home, home, when when i i found found myself myself sitting sitting down down in in my my own own small small house house with with dora; dora; quite quite thrown thrown out out of of employment, employment, as as i i may may say, say, in in respect respect of of the the delicious delicious old old occupation occupation of of making making love. love. it it seemed seemed such such an an extraordinary extraordinary thing thing to to have have dora dora always always there. there. it it was was so so unaccountable unaccountable not not to to be be obliged obliged to to go go out out to to see see her, her, not not to to have have any any occasion occasion to to be be tormenting tormenting myself myself about about her, her, not not to to have have to to write write to to her, her, not not to to be be scheming scheming and and devising devising opportunities opportunities of of being being alone alone with with her. her. sometimes sometimes of of an an evening, evening, when when i i looked looked up up from from my my writing, writing, and and saw saw her her seated seated opposite, opposite, i i would would lean lean back back in in my my chair, chair, and and think think how how queer queer it it was was that that there there we we were, were, alone alone together together as as a a matter matter of of course course -- -- nobody's nobody's business business any any more more -- -- all all the the romance romance of of our our engagement engagement put put away away upon upon a a shelf, shelf, to to rust rust -- -- no no one one to to please please but but one one another another -- -- one one another another to to please, please, for for life. life. when when there there was was a a debate, debate, and and i i was was kept kept out out very very late, late, it it seemed seemed so so strange strange to to me, me, as as i i was was walking walking home, home, to to think think that that dora dora was was at at home! home! it it was was such such a a wonderful wonderful thing, thing, at at first, first, to to have have her her coming coming softly softly down down to to talk talk to to me me as as i i ate ate my my supper. supper. it it was was such such a a stupendous stupendous thing thing to to know know for for certain certain that that she she put put her her hair hair in in papers. papers. it it was was altogether altogether such such an an astonishing astonishing event event to to see see her her do do it! it! i i doubt doubt whether whether two two young young birds birds could could have have known known less less about about keeping keeping house, house, than than i i and and my my pretty pretty dora dora did. did. we we had had a a servant, servant, of of course. course. she she kept kept house house for for us. us. i i have have still still a a latent latent belief belief that that she she must must have have been been mrs. mrs. crupp's crupp's daughter daughter in in disguise, disguise, we we had had such such an an awful awful time time of of it it with with mary mary anne. anne. her her name name was was paragon. paragon. her her nature nature was was represented represented to to us, us, when when we we engaged engaged her, her, as as being being feebly feebly expressed expressed in in her her name. name. she she had had a a written written character, character, as as large large as as a a proclamation; proclamation; and, and, according according to to this this document, document, could could do do everything everything of of a a domestic domestic nature nature that that ever ever i i heard heard of, of, and and a a great great many many things things that that i i never never did did hear hear of. of. she she was was a a woman woman in in the the prime prime of of life; life; of of a a severe severe countenance; countenance; and and subject subject (particularly (particularly in in the the arms) arms) to to a a sort sort of of perpetual perpetual measles measles or or fiery fiery rash. rash. she she had had a a cousin cousin in in the the life-guards, life-guards, with with such such long long legs legs that that he he looked looked like like the the afternoon afternoon shadow shadow of of somebody somebody else. else. his his shell-jacket shell-jacket was was as as much much too too little little for for him him as as he he was was too too big big for for the the premises. premises. he he made made the the cottage cottage smaller smaller than than it it need need have have been, been, by by being being so so very very much much out out of of proportion proportion to to it. it. besides besides which, which, the the walls walls were were not not thick, thick, and, and, whenever whenever he he passed passed the the evening evening at at our our house, house, we we always always knew knew of of it it by by hearing hearing one one continual continual growl growl in in the the kitchen. kitchen. our our treasure treasure was was warranted warranted sober sober and and honest. honest. i i am am therefore therefore willing willing to to believe believe that that she she was was in in a a fit fit when when we we found found her her under under the the boiler; boiler; and and that that the the deficient deficient tea-spoons tea-spoons were were attributable attributable to to the the dustman. dustman. but but she she preyed preyed upon upon our our minds minds dreadfully. dreadfully. we we felt felt our our inexperience, inexperience, and and were were unable unable to to help help ourselves. ourselves. we we should should have have been been at at her her mercy, mercy, if if she she had had had had any; any; but but she she was was a a remorseless remorseless woman, woman, and and had had none. none. she she was was the the cause cause of of our our first first little little quarrel. quarrel. 'my 'my dearest dearest life,' life,' i i said said one one day day to to dora, dora, 'do 'do you think think mary mary anne anne has has any any idea idea of of time?' time?' 'why, 'why, doady?' doady?' inquired inquired dora, dora, looking looking up, up, innocently, innocently, from from her her drawing. drawing. 'my 'my love, love, because because it's it's five, five, and and we we were were to to have have dined dined at at four.' four.' dora dora glanced glanced wistfully wistfully at at the the clock, clock, and and hinted hinted that that she she thought thought it it was was too too fast. fast. 'on 'on the the contrary, contrary, my my love,' love,' said said i, i, referring referring to to my my watch, watch, 'it's 'it's a a few few minutes minutes too too slow.' slow.' my my little little wife wife came came and and sat sat upon upon my my knee, knee, to to coax coax me me to to be be quiet, quiet, and and drew drew a a line line with with her her pencil pencil down down the the middle middle of of my my nose; nose; but but i i couldn't couldn't dine dine off off that, that, though though it it was was very very agreeable. agreeable. 'don't 'don't you think, think, my my dear,' dear,' said said i, i, 'it 'it would would be be better better for for you to to remonstrate remonstrate with with mary mary anne?' anne?' 'oh 'oh no, no, please! please! i i couldn't, couldn't, doady!' doady!' said said dora. dora. 'why 'why not, not, my my love?' love?' i i gently gently asked. asked. 'oh, 'oh, because because i i am am such such a a little little goose,' goose,' said said dora, dora, 'and 'and she she knows knows i i am!' am!' i i thought thought this this sentiment sentiment so so incompatible incompatible with with the the establishment establishment of of any any system system of of check check on on mary mary anne, anne, that that i i frowned frowned a a little. little. 'oh, 'oh, what what ugly ugly wrinkles wrinkles in in my my bad bad boy's boy's forehead!' forehead!' said said dora, dora, and and still still being being on on my my knee, knee, she she traced traced them them with with her her pencil; pencil; putting putting it it to to her her rosy rosy lips lips to to make make it it mark mark blacker, blacker, and and working working at at my my forehead forehead with with a a quaint quaint little little mockery mockery of of being being industrious, industrious, that that quite quite delighted delighted me me in in spite spite of of myself. myself. 'there's 'there's a a good good child,' child,' said said dora, dora, 'it 'it makes makes its its face face so so much much prettier prettier to to laugh.' laugh.' 'but, 'but, my my love,' love,' said said i. i. 'no, 'no, no! no! please!' please!' cried cried dora, dora, with with a a kiss, kiss, 'don't 'don't be be a a naughty naughty blue blue beard! beard! don't don't be be serious!' serious!' 'my 'my precious precious wife,' wife,' said said i, i, 'we 'we must must be be serious serious sometimes. sometimes. come! come! sit sit down down on on this this chair, chair, close close beside beside me! me! give give me me the the pencil! pencil! there! there! now now let let us us talk talk sensibly. sensibly. you know, know, dear'; dear'; what what a a little little hand hand it it was was to to hold, hold, and and what what a a tiny tiny wedding-ring wedding-ring it it was was to to see! see! 'you know, know, my my love, love, it it is is not not exactly exactly comfortable comfortable to to have have to to go go out out without without one's one's dinner. dinner. now, now, is is it?' it?' 'n-n-no!' 'n-n-no!' replied replied dora, dora, faintly. faintly. 'my 'my love, love, how how you tremble!' tremble!' 'because 'because i i know know you're you're going going to to scold scold me,' me,' exclaimed exclaimed dora, dora, in in a a piteous piteous voice. voice. 'my 'my sweet, sweet, i i am am only only going going to to reason.' reason.' 'oh, 'oh, but but reasoning reasoning is is worse worse than than scolding!' scolding!' exclaimed exclaimed dora, dora, in in despair. despair. 'i 'i didn't didn't marry marry to to be be reasoned reasoned with. with. if if you meant meant to to reason reason with with such such a a poor poor little little thing thing as as i i am, am, you ought ought to to have have told told me me so, so, you cruel cruel boy!' boy!' i i tried tried to to pacify pacify dora, dora, but but she she turned turned away away her her face, face, and and shook shook her her curls curls from from side side to to side, side, and and said, said, 'you cruel, cruel, cruel cruel boy!' boy!' so so many many times, times, that that i i really really did did not not exactly exactly know know what what to to do: do: so so i i took took a a few few turns turns up up and and down down the the room room in in my my uncertainty, uncertainty, and and came came back back again. again. 'dora, 'dora, my my darling!' darling!' 'no, 'no, i i am am not not your your darling. darling. because because you must must be be sorry sorry that that you married married me, me, or or else else you wouldn't wouldn't reason reason with with me!' me!' returned returned dora. dora. i i felt felt so so injured injured by by the the inconsequential inconsequential nature nature of of this this charge, charge, that that it it gave gave me me courage courage to to be be grave. grave. 'now, 'now, my my own own dora,' dora,' said said i, i, 'you are are very very childish, childish, and and are are talking talking nonsense. nonsense. you must must remember, remember, i i am am sure, sure, that that i i was was obliged obliged to to go go out out yesterday yesterday when when dinner dinner was was half half over; over; and and that, that, the the day day before, before, i i was was made made quite quite unwell unwell by by being being obliged obliged to to eat eat underdone underdone veal veal in in a a hurry; hurry; today, today, i i don't don't dine dine at at all all -- -- and and i i am am afraid afraid to to say say how how long long we we waited waited for for breakfast breakfast -- -- and and then then the the water water didn't didn't boil. boil. i i don't don't mean mean to to reproach reproach you, my my dear, dear, but but this this is is not not comfortable.' comfortable.' 'oh, 'oh, you cruel, cruel, cruel cruel boy, boy, to to say say i i am am a a disagreeable disagreeable wife!' wife!' cried cried dora. dora. 'now, 'now, my my dear dear dora, dora, you must must know know that that i i never never said said that!' that!' 'you said, said, i i wasn't wasn't comfortable!' comfortable!' cried cried dora. dora. 'i 'i said said the the housekeeping housekeeping was was not not comfortable!' comfortable!' 'it's 'it's exactly exactly the the same same thing!' thing!' cried cried dora. dora. and and she she evidently evidently thought thought so, so, for for she she wept wept most most grievously. grievously. i i took took another another turn turn across across the the room, room, full full of of love love for for my my pretty pretty wife, wife, and and distracted distracted by by self-accusatory self-accusatory inclinations inclinations to to knock knock my my head head against against the the door. door. i i sat sat down down again, again, and and said: said: 'i 'i am am not not blaming blaming you, dora. dora. we we have have both both a a great great deal deal to to learn. learn. i i am am only only trying trying to to show show you, my my dear, dear, that that you must must -- -- you really really must' must' (i (i was was resolved resolved not not to to give give this this up) up) -- -- 'accustom 'accustom yourself yourself to to look look after after mary mary anne. anne. likewise likewise to to act act a a little little for for yourself, yourself, and and me.' me.' 'i 'i wonder, wonder, i i do, do, at at your your making making such such ungrateful ungrateful speeches,' speeches,' sobbed sobbed dora. dora. 'when 'when you know know that that the the other other day, day, when when you said said you would would like like a a little little bit bit of of fish, fish, i i went went out out myself, myself, miles miles and and miles, miles, and and ordered ordered it, it, to to surprise surprise you.' 'and 'and it it was was very very kind kind of of you, my my own own darling,' darling,' said said i. i. 'i 'i felt felt it it so so much much that that i i wouldn't wouldn't on on any any account account have have even even mentioned mentioned that that you bought bought a a salmon salmon -- -- which which was was too too much much for for two. two. or or that that it it cost cost one one pound pound six six -- -- which which was was more more than than we we can can afford.' afford.' 'you enjoyed enjoyed it it very very much,' much,' sobbed sobbed dora. dora. 'and 'and you said said i i was was a a mouse.' mouse.' 'and 'and i'll i'll say say so so again, again, my my love,' love,' i i returned, returned, 'a 'a thousand thousand times!' times!' but but i i had had wounded wounded dora's dora's soft soft little little heart, heart, and and she she was was not not to to be be comforted. comforted. she she was was so so pathetic pathetic in in her her sobbing sobbing and and bewailing, bewailing, that that i i felt felt as as if if i i had had said said i i don't don't know know what what to to hurt hurt her. her. i i was was obliged obliged to to hurry hurry away; away; i i was was kept kept out out late; late; and and i i felt felt all all night night such such pangs pangs of of remorse remorse as as made made me me miserable. miserable. i i had had the the conscience conscience of of an an assassin, assassin, and and was was haunted haunted by by a a vague vague sense sense of of enormous enormous wickedness. wickedness. it it was was two two or or three three hours hours past past midnight midnight when when i i got got home. home. i i found found my my aunt, aunt, in in our our house, house, sitting sitting up up for for me. me. 'is 'is anything anything the the matter, matter, aunt?' aunt?' said said i, i, alarmed. alarmed. 'nothing, 'nothing, trot,' trot,' she she replied. replied. 'sit 'sit down, down, sit sit down. down. little little blossom blossom has has been been rather rather out out of of spirits, spirits, and and i i have have been been keeping keeping her her company. company. that's that's all.' all.' i i leaned leaned my my head head upon upon my my hand; hand; and and felt felt more more sorry sorry and and downcast, downcast, as as i i sat sat looking looking at at the the fire, fire, than than i i could could have have supposed supposed possible possible so so soon soon after after the the fulfilment fulfilment of of my my brightest brightest hopes. hopes. as as i i sat sat thinking, thinking, i i happened happened to to meet meet my my aunt's aunt's eyes, eyes, which which were were resting resting on on my my face. face. there there was was an an anxious anxious expression expression in in them, them, but but it it cleared cleared directly. directly. 'i 'i assure assure you, aunt,' aunt,' said said i, i, 'i 'i have have been been quite quite unhappy unhappy myself myself all all night, night, to to think think of of dora's dora's being being so. so. but but i i had had no no other other intention intention than than to to speak speak to to her her tenderly tenderly and and lovingly lovingly about about our our home-affairs.' home-affairs.' my my aunt aunt nodded nodded encouragement. encouragement. 'you must must have have patience, patience, trot,' trot,' said said she. she. 'of 'of course. course. heaven heaven knows knows i i don't don't mean mean to to be be unreasonable, unreasonable, aunt!' aunt!' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'but 'but little little blossom blossom is is a a very very tender tender little little blossom, blossom, and and the the wind wind must must be be gentle gentle with with her.' her.' i i thanked thanked my my good good aunt, aunt, in in my my heart, heart, for for her her tenderness tenderness towards towards my my wife; wife; and and i i was was sure sure that that she she knew knew i i did. did. 'don't 'don't you think, think, aunt,' aunt,' said said i, i, after after some some further further contemplation contemplation of of the the fire, fire, 'that 'that you could could advise advise and and counsel counsel dora dora a a little, little, for for our our mutual mutual advantage, advantage, now now and and then?' then?' 'trot,' 'trot,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, with with some some emotion, emotion, 'no! 'no! don't don't ask ask me me such such a a thing.' thing.' her her tone tone was was so so very very earnest earnest that that i i raised raised my my eyes eyes in in surprise. surprise. 'i 'i look look back back on on my my life, life, child,' child,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and i i think think of of some some who who are are in in their their graves, graves, with with whom whom i i might might have have been been on on kinder kinder terms. terms. if if i i judged judged harshly harshly of of other other people's people's mistakes mistakes in in marriage, marriage, it it may may have have been been because because i i had had bitter bitter reason reason to to judge judge harshly harshly of of my my own. own. let let that that pass. pass. i i have have been been a a grumpy, grumpy, frumpy, frumpy, wayward wayward sort sort of of a a woman, woman, a a good good many many years. years. i i am am still, still, and and i i always always shall shall be. be. but but you and and i i have have done done one one another another some some good, good, trot, trot, -- -- at at all all events, events, you have have done done me me good, good, my my dear; dear; and and division division must must not not come come between between us, us, at at this this time time of of day.' day.' 'division 'division between between us!' us!' cried cried i. i. 'child, 'child, child!' child!' said said my my aunt, aunt, smoothing smoothing her her dress, dress, 'how 'how soon soon it it might might come come between between us, us, or or how how unhappy unhappy i i might might make make our our little little blossom, blossom, if if i i meddled meddled in in anything, anything, a a prophet prophet couldn't couldn't say. say. i i want want our our pet pet to to like like me, me, and and be be as as gay gay as as a a butterfly. butterfly. remember remember your your own own home, home, in in that that second second marriage; marriage; and and never never do do both both me me and and her her the the injury injury you have have hinted hinted at!' at!' i i comprehended, comprehended, at at once, once, that that my my aunt aunt was was right; right; and and i i comprehended comprehended the the full full extent extent of of her her generous generous feeling feeling towards towards my my dear dear wife. wife. 'these 'these are are early early days, days, trot,' trot,' she she pursued, pursued, 'and 'and rome rome was was not not built built in in a a day, day, nor nor in in a a year. year. you have have chosen chosen freely freely for for yourself'; yourself'; a a cloud cloud passed passed over over her her face face for for a a moment, moment, i i thought; thought; 'and 'and you have have chosen chosen a a very very pretty pretty and and a a very very affectionate affectionate creature. creature. it it will will be be your your duty, duty, and and it it will will be be your your pleasure pleasure too too -- -- of of course course i i know know that; that; i i am am not not delivering delivering a a lecture lecture -- -- to to estimate estimate her her (as (as you chose chose her) her) by by the the qualities qualities she she has, has, and and not not by by the the qualities qualities she she may may not not have. have. the the latter latter you must must develop develop in in her, her, if if you can. can. and and if if you cannot, cannot, child,' child,' here here my my aunt aunt rubbed rubbed her her nose, nose, 'you must must just just accustom accustom yourself yourself to to do do without without 'em. 'em. but but remember, remember, my my dear, dear, your your future future is is between between you two. two. no no one one can can assist assist you; you are are to to work work it it out out for for yourselves. yourselves. this this is is marriage, marriage, trot; trot; and and heaven heaven bless bless you both, both, in in it, it, for for a a pair pair of of babes babes in in the the wood wood as as you are!' are!' my my aunt aunt said said this this in in a a sprightly sprightly way, way, and and gave gave me me a a kiss kiss to to ratify ratify the the blessing. blessing. 'now,' 'now,' said said she, she, 'light 'light my my little little lantern, lantern, and and see see me me into into my my bandbox bandbox by by the the garden garden path'; path'; for for there there was was a a communication communication between between our our cottages cottages in in that that direction. direction. 'give 'give betsey betsey trotwood's trotwood's love love to to blossom, blossom, when when you come come back; back; and and whatever whatever you do, do, trot, trot, never never dream dream of of setting setting betsey betsey up up as as a a scarecrow, scarecrow, for for if if i i ever ever saw saw her her in in the the glass, glass, she's she's quite quite grim grim enough enough and and gaunt gaunt enough enough in in her her private private capacity!' capacity!' with with this this my my aunt aunt tied tied her her head head up up in in a a handkerchief, handkerchief, with with which which she she was was accustomed accustomed to to make make a a bundle bundle of of it it on on such such occasions; occasions; and and i i escorted escorted her her home. home. as as she she stood stood in in her her garden, garden, holding holding up up her her little little lantern lantern to to light light me me back, back, i i thought thought her her observation observation of of me me had had an an anxious anxious air air again; again; but but i i was was too too much much occupied occupied in in pondering pondering on on what what she she had had said, said, and and too too much much impressed impressed -- -- for for the the first first time, time, in in reality reality -- -- by by the the conviction conviction that that dora dora and and i i had had indeed indeed to to work work out out our our future future for for ourselves, ourselves, and and that that no no one one could could assist assist us, us, to to take take much much notice notice of of it. it. dora dora came came stealing stealing down down in in her her little little slippers, slippers, to to meet meet me, me, now now that that i i was was alone; alone; and and cried cried upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, and and said said i i had had been been hard-hearted hard-hearted and and she she had had been been naughty; naughty; and and i i said said much much the the same same thing thing in in effect, effect, i i believe; believe; and and we we made made it it up, up, and and agreed agreed that that our our first first little little difference difference was was to to be be our our last, last, and and that that we we were were never never to to have have another another if if we we lived lived a a hundred hundred years. years. the the next next domestic domestic trial trial we we went went through, through, was was the the ordeal ordeal of of servants. servants. mary mary anne's anne's cousin cousin deserted deserted into into our our coal-hole, coal-hole, and and was was brought brought out, out, to to our our great great amazement, amazement, by by a a piquet piquet of of his his companions companions in in arms, arms, who who took took him him away away handcuffed handcuffed in in a a procession procession that that covered covered our our front-garden front-garden with with ignominy. ignominy. this this nerved nerved me me to to get get rid rid of of mary mary anne, anne, who who went went so so mildly, mildly, on on receipt receipt of of wages, wages, that that i i was was surprised, surprised, until until i i found found out out about about the the tea-spoons, tea-spoons, and and also also about about the the little little sums sums she she had had borrowed borrowed in in my my name name of of the the tradespeople tradespeople without without authority. authority. after after an an interval interval of of mrs. mrs. kidgerbury kidgerbury -- -- the the oldest oldest inhabitant inhabitant of of kentish kentish town, town, i i believe, believe, who who went went out out charing, charing, but but was was too too feeble feeble to to execute execute her her conceptions conceptions of of that that art art -- -- we we found found another another treasure, treasure, who who was was one one of of the the most most amiable amiable of of women, women, but but who who generally generally made made a a point point of of falling falling either either up up or or down down the the kitchen kitchen stairs stairs with with the the tray, tray, and and almost almost plunged plunged into into the the parlour, parlour, as as into into a a bath, bath, with with the the tea-things. tea-things. the the ravages ravages committed committed by by this this unfortunate, unfortunate, rendering rendering her her dismissal dismissal necessary, necessary, she she was was succeeded succeeded (with (with intervals intervals of of mrs. mrs. kidgerbury) kidgerbury) by by a a long long line line of of incapables; incapables; terminating terminating in in a a young young person person of of genteel genteel appearance, appearance, who who went went to to greenwich greenwich fair fair in in dora's dora's bonnet. bonnet. after after whom whom i i remember remember nothing nothing but but an an average average equality equality of of failure. failure. everybody everybody we we had had anything anything to to do do with with seemed seemed to to cheat cheat us. us. our our appearance appearance in in a a shop shop was was a a signal signal for for the the damaged damaged goods goods to to be be brought brought out out immediately. immediately. if if we we bought bought a a lobster, lobster, it it was was full full of of water. water. all all our our meat meat turned turned out out to to be be tough, tough, and and there there was was hardly hardly any any crust crust to to our our loaves. loaves. in in search search of of the the principle principle on on which which joints joints ought ought to to be be roasted, roasted, to to be be roasted roasted enough, enough, and and not not too too much, much, i i myself myself referred referred to to the the cookery cookery book, book, and and found found it it there there established established as as the the allowance allowance of of a a quarter quarter of of an an hour hour to to every every pound, pound, and and say say a a quarter quarter over. over. but but the the principle principle always always failed failed us us by by some some curious curious fatality, fatality, and and we we never never could could hit hit any any medium medium between between redness redness and and cinders. cinders. i i had had reason reason to to believe believe that that in in accomplishing accomplishing these these failures failures we we incurred incurred a a far far greater greater expense expense than than if if we we had had achieved achieved a a series series of of triumphs. triumphs. it it appeared appeared to to me, me, on on looking looking over over the the tradesmen's tradesmen's books, books, as as if if we we might might have have kept kept the the basement basement storey storey paved paved with with butter, butter, such such was was the the extensive extensive scale scale of of our our consumption consumption of of that that article. article. i i don't don't know know whether whether the the excise excise returns returns of of the the period period may may have have exhibited exhibited any any increase increase in in the the demand demand for for pepper; pepper; but but if if our our performances performances did did not not affect affect the the market, market, i i should should say say several several families families must must have have left left off off using using it. it. and and the the most most wonderful wonderful fact fact of of all all was, was, that that we we never never had had anything anything in in the the house. house. as as to to the the washerwoman washerwoman pawning pawning the the clothes, clothes, and and coming coming in in a a state state of of penitent penitent intoxication intoxication to to apologize, apologize, i i suppose suppose that that might might have have happened happened several several times times to to anybody. anybody. also also the the chimney chimney on on fire, fire, the the parish parish engine, engine, and and perjury perjury on on the the part part of of the the beadle. beadle. but but i i apprehend apprehend that that we we were were personally personally fortunate fortunate in in engaging engaging a a servant servant with with a a taste taste for for cordials, cordials, who who swelled swelled our our running running account account for for porter porter at at the the public-house public-house by by such such inexplicable inexplicable items items as as 'quartern 'quartern rum rum shrub shrub (mrs. (mrs. c.)'; c.)'; 'half-quartern 'half-quartern gin gin and and cloves cloves (mrs. (mrs. c.)'; c.)'; 'glass 'glass rum rum and and peppermint peppermint (mrs. (mrs. c.)' c.)' -- -- the the parentheses parentheses always always referring referring to to dora, dora, who who was was supposed, supposed, it it appeared appeared on on explanation, explanation, to to have have imbibed imbibed the the whole whole of of these these refreshments. refreshments. one one of of our our first first feats feats in in the the housekeeping housekeeping way way was was a a little little dinner dinner to to traddles. traddles. i i met met him him in in town, town, and and asked asked him him to to walk walk out out with with me me that that afternoon. afternoon. he he readily readily consenting, consenting, i i wrote wrote to to dora, dora, saying saying i i would would bring bring him him home. home. it it was was pleasant pleasant weather, weather, and and on on the the road road we we made made my my domestic domestic happiness happiness the the theme theme of of conversation. conversation. traddles traddles was was very very full full of of it; it; and and said, said, that, that, picturing picturing himself himself with with such such a a home, home, and and sophy sophy waiting waiting and and preparing preparing for for him, him, he he could could think think of of nothing nothing wanting wanting to to complete complete his his bliss. bliss. i i could could not not have have wished wished for for a a prettier prettier little little wife wife at at the the opposite opposite end end of of the the table, table, but but i i certainly certainly could could have have wished, wished, when when we we sat sat down, down, for for a a little little more more room. room. i i did did not not know know how how it it was, was, but but though though there there were were only only two two of of us, us, we we were were at at once once always always cramped cramped for for room, room, and and yet yet had had always always room room enough enough to to lose lose everything everything in. in. i i suspect suspect it it may may have have been been because because nothing nothing had had a a place place of of its its own, own, except except jip's jip's pagoda, pagoda, which which invariably invariably blocked blocked up up the the main main thoroughfare. thoroughfare. on on the the present present occasion, occasion, traddles traddles was was so so hemmed hemmed in in by by the the pagoda pagoda and and the the guitar-case, guitar-case, and and dora's dora's flower-painting, flower-painting, and and my my writing-table, writing-table, that that i i had had serious serious doubts doubts of of the the possibility possibility of of his his using using his his knife knife and and fork; fork; but but he he protested, protested, with with his his own own good-humour, good-humour, 'oceans 'oceans of of room, room, copperfield! copperfield! i i assure assure you, oceans!' oceans!' there there was was another another thing thing i i could could have have wished, wished, namely, namely, that that jip jip had had never never been been encouraged encouraged to to walk walk about about the the tablecloth tablecloth during during dinner. dinner. i i began began to to think think there there was was something something disorderly disorderly in in his his being being there there at at all, all, even even if if he he had had not not been been in in the the habit habit of of putting putting his his foot foot in in the the salt salt or or the the melted melted butter. butter. on on this this occasion occasion he he seemed seemed to to think think he he was was introduced introduced expressly expressly to to keep keep traddles traddles at at bay; bay; and and he he barked barked at at my my old old friend, friend, and and made made short short runs runs at at his his plate, plate, with with such such undaunted undaunted pertinacity, pertinacity, that that he he may may be be said said to to have have engrossed engrossed the the conversation. conversation. however, however, as as i i knew knew how how tender-hearted tender-hearted my my dear dear dora dora was, was, and and how how sensitive sensitive she she would would be be to to any any slight slight upon upon her her favourite, favourite, i i hinted hinted no no objection. objection. for for similar similar reasons reasons i i made made no no allusion allusion to to the the skirmishing skirmishing plates plates upon upon the the floor; floor; or or to to the the disreputable disreputable appearance appearance of of the the castors, castors, which which were were all all at at sixes sixes and and sevens, sevens, and and looked looked drunk; drunk; or or to to the the further further blockade blockade of of traddles traddles by by wandering wandering vegetable vegetable dishes dishes and and jugs. jugs. i i could could not not help help wondering wondering in in my my own own mind, mind, as as i i contemplated contemplated the the boiled boiled leg leg of of mutton mutton before before me, me, previous previous to to carving carving it, it, how how it it came came to to pass pass that that our our joints joints of of meat meat were were of of such such extraordinary extraordinary shapes shapes -- -- and and whether whether our our butcher butcher contracted contracted for for all all the the deformed deformed sheep sheep that that came came into into the the world; world; but but i i kept kept my my reflections reflections to to myself. myself. 'my 'my love,' love,' said said i i to to dora, dora, 'what 'what have have you got got in in that that dish?' dish?' i i could could not not imagine imagine why why dora dora had had been been making making tempting tempting little little faces faces at at me, me, as as if if she she wanted wanted to to kiss kiss me. me. 'oysters, 'oysters, dear,' dear,' said said dora, dora, timidly. timidly. 'was 'was that that your your thought?' thought?' said said i, i, delighted. delighted. 'ye-yes, 'ye-yes, doady,' doady,' said said dora. dora. 'there 'there never never was was a a happier happier one!' one!' i i exclaimed, exclaimed, laying laying down down the the carving-knife carving-knife and and fork. fork. 'there 'there is is nothing nothing traddles traddles likes likes so so much!' much!' 'ye-yes, 'ye-yes, doady,' doady,' said said dora, dora, 'and 'and so so i i bought bought a a beautiful beautiful little little barrel barrel of of them, them, and and the the man man said said they they were were very very good. good. but but i i -- -- i i am am afraid afraid there's there's something something the the matter matter with with them. them. they they don't don't seem seem right.' right.' here here dora dora shook shook her her head, head, and and diamonds diamonds twinkled twinkled in in her her eyes. eyes. 'they 'they are are only only opened opened in in both both shells,' shells,' said said i. i. 'take 'take the the top top one one off, off, my my love.' love.' 'but 'but it it won't won't come come off!' off!' said said dora, dora, trying trying very very hard, hard, and and looking looking very very much much distressed. distressed. 'do 'do you know, know, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, cheerfully cheerfully examining examining the the dish, dish, 'i 'i think think it it is is in in consequence consequence -- -- they they are are capital capital oysters, oysters, but but i i think think it it is is in in consequence consequence -- -- of of their their never never having having been been opened.' opened.' they they never never had had been been opened; opened; and and we we had had no no oyster-knives oyster-knives -- -- and and couldn't couldn't have have used used them them if if we we had; had; so so we we looked looked at at the the oysters oysters and and ate ate the the mutton. mutton. at at least least we we ate ate as as much much of of it it as as was was done, done, and and made made up up with with capers. capers. if if i i had had permitted permitted him, him, i i am am satisfied satisfied that that traddles traddles would would have have made made a a perfect perfect savage savage of of himself, himself, and and eaten eaten a a plateful plateful of of raw raw meat, meat, to to express express enjoyment enjoyment of of the the repast; repast; but but i i would would hear hear of of no no such such immolation immolation on on the the altar altar of of friendship, friendship, and and we we had had a a course course of of bacon bacon instead; instead; there there happening, happening, by by good good fortune, fortune, to to be be cold cold bacon bacon in in the the larder. larder. my my poor poor little little wife wife was was in in such such affliction affliction when when she she thought thought i i should should be be annoyed, annoyed, and and in in such such a a state state of of joy joy when when she she found found i i was was not, not, that that the the discomfiture discomfiture i i had had subdued, subdued, very very soon soon vanished, vanished, and and we we passed passed a a happy happy evening; evening; dora dora sitting sitting with with her her arm arm on on my my chair chair while while traddles traddles and and i i discussed discussed a a glass glass of of wine, wine, and and taking taking every every opportunity opportunity of of whispering whispering in in my my ear ear that that it it was was so so good good of of me me not not to to be be a a cruel, cruel, cross cross old old boy. boy. by by and and by by she she made made tea tea for for us; us; which which it it was was so so pretty pretty to to see see her her do, do, as as if if she she was was busying busying herself herself with with a a set set of of doll's doll's tea-things, tea-things, that that i i was was not not particular particular about about the the quality quality of of the the beverage. beverage. then then traddles traddles and and i i played played a a game game or or two two at at cribbage; cribbage; and and dora dora singing singing to to the the guitar guitar the the while, while, it it seemed seemed to to me me as as if if our our courtship courtship and and marriage marriage were were a a tender tender dream dream of of mine, mine, and and the the night night when when i i first first listened listened to to her her voice voice were were not not yet yet over. over. when when traddles traddles went went away, away, and and i i came came back back into into the the parlour parlour from from seeing seeing him him out, out, my my wife wife planted planted her her chair chair close close to to mine, mine, and and sat sat down down by by my my side. side. 'i 'i am am very very sorry,' sorry,' she she said. said. 'will 'will you try try to to teach teach me, me, doady?' doady?' 'i 'i must must teach teach myself myself first, first, dora,' dora,' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am as as bad bad as as you, love.' love.' 'ah! 'ah! but but you can can learn,' learn,' she she returned; returned; 'and 'and you are are a a clever, clever, clever clever man!' man!' 'nonsense, 'nonsense, mouse!' mouse!' said said i. i. 'i 'i wish,' wish,' resumed resumed my my wife, wife, after after a a long long silence, silence, 'that 'that i i could could have have gone gone down down into into the the country country for for a a whole whole year, year, and and lived lived with with agnes!' agnes!' her her hands hands were were clasped clasped upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, and and her her chin chin rested rested on on them, them, and and her her blue blue eyes eyes looked looked quietly quietly into into mine. mine. 'why 'why so?' so?' i i asked. asked. 'i 'i think think she she might might have have improved improved me, me, and and i i think think i i might might have have learned learned from from her,' her,' said said dora. dora. 'all 'all in in good good time, time, my my love. love. agnes agnes has has had had her her father father to to take take care care of of for for these these many many years, years, you should should remember. remember. even even when when she she was was quite quite a a child, child, she she was was the the agnes agnes whom whom we we know,' know,' said said i. i. 'will 'will you call call me me a a name name i i want want you to to call call me?' me?' inquired inquired dora, dora, without without moving. moving. 'what 'what is is it?' it?' i i asked asked with with a a smile. smile. 'it's 'it's a a stupid stupid name,' name,' she she said, said, shaking shaking her her curls curls for for a a moment. moment. 'child-wife.' 'child-wife.' i i laughingly laughingly asked asked my my child-wife child-wife what what her her fancy fancy was was in in desiring desiring to to be be so so called. called. she she answered answered without without moving, moving, otherwise otherwise than than as as the the arm arm i i twined twined about about her her may may have have brought brought her her blue blue eyes eyes nearer nearer to to me: me: 'i 'i don't don't mean, mean, you silly silly fellow, fellow, that that you should should use use the the name name instead instead of of dora. dora. i i only only mean mean that that you should should think think of of me me that that way. way. when when you are are going going to to be be angry angry with with me, me, say say to to yourself, yourself, "it's "it's only only my my child-wife!" child-wife!" when when i i am am very very disappointing, disappointing, say, say, "i "i knew, knew, a a long long time time ago, ago, that that she she would would make make but but a a child-wife!" child-wife!" when when you miss miss what what i i should should like like to to be, be, and and i i think think can can never never be, be, say, say, "still "still my my foolish foolish child-wife child-wife loves loves me!" me!" for for indeed indeed i i do.' do.' i i had had not not been been serious serious with with her; her; having having no no idea idea until until now, now, that that she she was was serious serious herself. herself. but but her her affectionate affectionate nature nature was was so so happy happy in in what what i i now now said said to to her her with with my my whole whole heart, heart, that that her her face face became became a a laughing laughing one one before before her her glittering glittering eyes eyes were were dry. dry. she she was was soon soon my my child-wife child-wife indeed; indeed; sitting sitting down down on on the the floor floor outside outside the the chinese chinese house, house, ringing ringing all all the the little little bells bells one one after after another, another, to to punish punish jip jip for for his his recent recent bad bad behaviour; behaviour; while while jip jip lay lay blinking blinking in in the the doorway doorway with with his his head head out, out, even even too too lazy lazy to to be be teased. teased. this this appeal appeal of of dora's dora's made made a a strong strong impression impression on on me. me. i i look look back back on on the the time time i i write write of; of; i i invoke invoke the the innocent innocent figure figure that that i i dearly dearly loved, loved, to to come come out out from from the the mists mists and and shadows shadows of of the the past, past, and and turn turn its its gentle gentle head head towards towards me me once once again; again; and and i i can can still still declare declare that that this this one one little little speech speech was was constantly constantly in in my my memory. memory. i i may may not not have have used used it it to to the the best best account; account; i i was was young young and and inexperienced; inexperienced; but but i i never never turned turned a a deaf deaf ear ear to to its its artless artless pleading. pleading. dora dora told told me, me, shortly shortly afterwards, afterwards, that that she she was was going going to to be be a a wonderful wonderful housekeeper. housekeeper. accordingly, accordingly, she she polished polished the the tablets, tablets, pointed pointed the the pencil, pencil, bought bought an an immense immense account-book, account-book, carefully carefully stitched stitched up up with with a a needle needle and and thread thread all all the the leaves leaves of of the the cookery cookery book book which which jip jip had had torn, torn, and and made made quite quite a a desperate desperate little little attempt attempt 'to 'to be be good', good', as as she she called called it. it. but but the the figures figures had had the the old old obstinate obstinate propensity propensity -- -- they they would would not not add add up. up. when when she she had had entered entered two two or or three three laborious laborious items items in in the the account-book, account-book, jip jip would would walk walk over over the the page, page, wagging wagging his his tail, tail, and and smear smear them them all all out. out. her her own own little little right-hand right-hand middle middle finger finger got got steeped steeped to to the the very very bone bone in in ink; ink; and and i i think think that that was was the the only only decided decided result result obtained. obtained. sometimes, sometimes, of of an an evening, evening, when when i i was was at at home home and and at at work work -- -- for for i i wrote wrote a a good good deal deal now, now, and and was was beginning beginning in in a a small small way way to to be be known known as as a a writer writer -- -- i i would would lay lay down down my my pen, pen, and and watch watch my my child-wife child-wife trying trying to to be be good. good. first first of of all, all, she she would would bring bring out out the the immense immense account-book, account-book, and and lay lay it it down down upon upon the the table, table, with with a a deep deep sigh. sigh. then then she she would would open open it it at at the the place place where where jip jip had had made made it it illegible illegible last last night, night, and and call call jip jip up, up, to to look look at at his his misdeeds. misdeeds. this this would would occasion occasion a a diversion diversion in in jip's jip's favour, favour, and and some some inking inking of of his his nose, nose, perhaps, perhaps, as as a a penalty. penalty. then then she she would would tell tell jip jip to to lie lie down down on on the the table table instantly, instantly, 'like 'like a a lion' lion' -- -- which which was was one one of of his his tricks, tricks, though though i i cannot cannot say say the the likeness likeness was was striking striking -- -- and, and, if if he he were were in in an an obedient obedient humour, humour, he he would would obey. obey. then then she she would would take take up up a a pen, pen, and and begin begin to to write, write, and and find find a a hair hair in in it. it. then then she she would would take take up up another another pen, pen, and and begin begin to to write, write, and and find find that that it it spluttered. spluttered. then then she she would would take take up up another another pen, pen, and and begin begin to to write, write, and and say say in in a a low low voice, voice, 'oh, 'oh, it's it's a a talking talking pen, pen, and and will will disturb disturb doady!' doady!' and and then then she she would would give give it it up up as as a a bad bad job, job, and and put put the the account-book account-book away, away, after after pretending pretending to to crush crush the the lion lion with with it. it. or, or, if if she she were were in in a a very very sedate sedate and and serious serious state state of of mind, mind, she she would would sit sit down down with with the the tablets, tablets, and and a a little little basket basket of of bills bills and and other other documents, documents, which which looked looked more more like like curl-papers curl-papers than than anything anything else, else, and and endeavour endeavour to to get get some some result result out out of of them. them. after after severely severely comparing comparing one one with with another, another, and and making making entries entries on on the the tablets, tablets, and and blotting blotting them them out, out, and and counting counting all all the the fingers fingers of of her her left left hand hand over over and and over over again, again, backwards backwards and and forwards, forwards, she she would would be be so so vexed vexed and and discouraged, discouraged, and and would would look look so so unhappy, unhappy, that that it it gave gave me me pain pain to to see see her her bright bright face face clouded clouded -- -- and and for for me! me! -- -- and and i i would would go go softly softly to to her, her, and and say: say: 'what's 'what's the the matter, matter, dora?' dora?' dora dora would would look look up up hopelessly, hopelessly, and and reply, reply, 'they 'they won't won't come come right. right. they they make make my my head head ache ache so. so. and and they they won't won't do do anything anything i i want!' want!' then then i i would would say, say, 'now 'now let let us us try try together. together. let let me me show show you, dora.' dora.' then then i i would would commence commence a a practical practical demonstration, demonstration, to to which which dora dora would would pay pay profound profound attention, attention, perhaps perhaps for for five five minutes; minutes; when when she she would would begin begin to to be be dreadfully dreadfully tired, tired, and and would would lighten lighten the the subject subject by by curling curling my my hair, hair, or or trying trying the the effect effect of of my my face face with with my my shirt-collar shirt-collar turned turned down. down. if if i i tacitly tacitly checked checked this this playfulness, playfulness, and and persisted, persisted, she she would would look look so so scared scared and and disconsolate, disconsolate, as as she she became became more more and and more more bewildered, bewildered, that that the the remembrance remembrance of of her her natural natural gaiety gaiety when when i i first first strayed strayed into into her her path, path, and and of of her her being being my my child-wife, child-wife, would would come come reproachfully reproachfully upon upon me; me; and and i i would would lay lay the the pencil pencil down, down, and and call call for for the the guitar. guitar. i i had had a a great great deal deal of of work work to to do, do, and and had had many many anxieties, anxieties, but but the the same same considerations considerations made made me me keep keep them them to to myself. myself. i i am am far far from from sure, sure, now, now, that that it it was was right right to to do do this, this, but but i i did did it it for for my my child-wife's child-wife's sake. sake. i i search search my my breast, breast, and and i i commit commit its its secrets, secrets, if if i i know know them, them, without without any any reservation reservation to to this this paper. paper. the the old old unhappy unhappy loss loss or or want want of of something something had, had, i i am am conscious, conscious, some some place place in in my my heart; heart; but but not not to to the the embitterment embitterment of of my my life. life. when when i i walked walked alone alone in in the the fine fine weather, weather, and and thought thought of of the the summer summer days days when when all all the the air air had had been been filled filled with with my my boyish boyish enchantment, enchantment, i i did did miss miss something something of of the the realization realization of of my my dreams; dreams; but but i i thought thought it it was was a a softened softened glory glory of of the the past, past, which which nothing nothing could could have have thrown thrown upon upon the the present present time. time. i i did did feel, feel, sometimes, sometimes, for for a a little little while, while, that that i i could could have have wished wished my my wife wife had had been been my my counsellor; counsellor; had had had had more more character character and and purpose, purpose, to to sustain sustain me me and and improve improve me me by; by; had had been been endowed endowed with with power power to to fill fill up up the the void void which which somewhere somewhere seemed seemed to to be be about about me; me; but but i i felt felt as as if if this this were were an an unearthly unearthly consummation consummation of of my my happiness, happiness, that that never never had had been been meant meant to to be, be, and and never never could could have have been. been. i i was was a a boyish boyish husband husband as as to to years. years. i i had had known known the the softening softening influence influence of of no no other other sorrows sorrows or or experiences experiences than than those those recorded recorded in in these these leaves. leaves. if if i i did did any any wrong, wrong, as as i i may may have have done done much, much, i i did did it it in in mistaken mistaken love, love, and and in in my my want want of of wisdom. wisdom. i i write write the the exact exact truth. truth. it it would would avail avail me me nothing nothing to to extenuate extenuate it it now. now. thus thus it it was was that that i i took took upon upon myself myself the the toils toils and and cares cares of of our our life, life, and and had had no no partner partner in in them. them. we we lived lived much much as as before, before, in in reference reference to to our our scrambling scrambling household household arrangements; arrangements; but but i i had had got got used used to to those, those, and and dora dora i i was was pleased pleased to to see see was was seldom seldom vexed vexed now. now. she she was was bright bright and and cheerful cheerful in in the the old old childish childish way, way, loved loved me me dearly, dearly, and and was was happy happy with with her her old old trifles. trifles. when when the the debates debates were were heavy heavy -- -- i i mean mean as as to to length, length, not not quality, quality, for for in in the the last last respect respect they they were were not not often often otherwise otherwise -- -- and and i i went went home home late, late, dora dora would would never never rest rest when when she she heard heard my my footsteps, footsteps, but but would would always always come come downstairs downstairs to to meet meet me. me. when when my my evenings evenings were were unoccupied unoccupied by by the the pursuit pursuit for for which which i i had had qualified qualified myself myself with with so so much much pains, pains, and and i i was was engaged engaged in in writing writing at at home, home, she she would would sit sit quietly quietly near near me, me, however however late late the the hour, hour, and and be be so so mute, mute, that that i i would would often often think think she she had had dropped dropped asleep. asleep. but but generally, generally, when when i i raised raised my my head, head, i i saw saw her her blue blue eyes eyes looking looking at at me me with with the the quiet quiet attention attention of of which which i i have have already already spoken. spoken. 'oh, 'oh, what what a a weary weary boy!' boy!' said said dora dora one one night, night, when when i i met met her her eyes eyes as as i i was was shutting shutting up up my my desk. desk. 'what 'what a a weary weary girl!' girl!' said said i. i. 'that's 'that's more more to to the the purpose. purpose. you must must go go to to bed bed another another time, time, my my love. love. it's it's far far too too late late for for you.' 'no, 'no, don't don't send send me me to to bed!' bed!' pleaded pleaded dora, dora, coming coming to to my my side. side. 'pray, 'pray, don't don't do do that!' that!' 'dora!' 'dora!' to to my my amazement amazement she she was was sobbing sobbing on on my my neck. neck. 'not 'not well, well, my my dear! dear! not not happy!' happy!' 'yes! 'yes! quite quite well, well, and and very very happy!' happy!' said said dora. dora. 'but 'but say say you'll you'll let let me me stop, stop, and and see see you write.' write.' 'why, 'why, what what a a sight sight for for such such bright bright eyes eyes at at midnight!' midnight!' i i replied. replied. 'are 'are they they bright, bright, though?' though?' returned returned dora, dora, laughing. laughing. 'i'm 'i'm so so glad glad they're they're bright.' bright.' 'little 'little vanity!' vanity!' said said i. i. but but it it was was not not vanity; vanity; it it was was only only harmless harmless delight delight in in my my admiration. admiration. i i knew knew that that very very well, well, before before she she told told me me so. so. 'if 'if you think think them them pretty, pretty, say say i i may may always always stop, stop, and and see see you write!' write!' said said dora. dora. 'do 'do you think think them them pretty?' pretty?' 'very 'very pretty.' pretty.' 'then 'then let let me me always always stop stop and and see see you write.' write.' 'i 'i am am afraid afraid that that won't won't improve improve their their brightness, brightness, dora.' dora.' 'yes, 'yes, it it will! will! because, because, you clever clever boy, boy, you'll you'll not not forget forget me me then, then, while while you are are full full of of silent silent fancies. fancies. will will you mind mind it, it, if if i i say say something something very, very, very very silly? silly? -- -- -more -more than than usual?' usual?' inquired inquired dora, dora, peeping peeping over over my my shoulder shoulder into into my my face. face. 'what 'what wonderful wonderful thing thing is is that?' that?' said said i. i. 'please 'please let let me me hold hold the the pens,' pens,' said said dora. dora. 'i 'i want want to to have have something something to to do do with with all all those those many many hours hours when when you are are so so industrious. industrious. may may i i hold hold the the pens?' pens?' the the remembrance remembrance of of her her pretty pretty joy joy when when i i said said yes, yes, brings brings tears tears into into my my eyes. eyes. the the next next time time i i sat sat down down to to write, write, and and regularly regularly afterwards, afterwards, she she sat sat in in her her old old place, place, with with a a spare spare bundle bundle of of pens pens at at her her side. side. her her triumph triumph in in this this connexion connexion with with my my work, work, and and her her delight delight when when i i wanted wanted a a new new pen pen -- -- which which i i very very often often feigned feigned to to do do -- -- suggested suggested to to me me a a new new way way of of pleasing pleasing my my child-wife. child-wife. i i occasionally occasionally made made a a pretence pretence of of wanting wanting a a page page or or two two of of manuscript manuscript copied. copied. then then dora dora was was in in her her glory. glory. the the preparations preparations she she made made for for this this great great work, work, the the aprons aprons she she put put on, on, the the bibs bibs she she borrowed borrowed from from the the kitchen kitchen to to keep keep off off the the ink, ink, the the time time she she took, took, the the innumerable innumerable stoppages stoppages she she made made to to have have a a laugh laugh with with jip jip as as if if he he understood understood it it all, all, her her conviction conviction that that her her work work was was incomplete incomplete unless unless she she signed signed her her name name at at the the end, end, and and the the way way in in which which she she would would bring bring it it to to me, me, like like a a school-copy, school-copy, and and then, then, when when i i praised praised it, it, clasp clasp me me round round the the neck, neck, are are touching touching recollections recollections to to me, me, simple simple as as they they might might appear appear to to other other men. men. she she took took possession possession of of the the keys keys soon soon after after this, this, and and went went jingling jingling about about the the house house with with the the whole whole bunch bunch in in a a little little basket, basket, tied tied to to her her slender slender waist. waist. i i seldom seldom found found that that the the places places to to which which they they belonged belonged were were locked, locked, or or that that they they were were of of any any use use except except as as a a plaything plaything for for jip jip -- -- but but dora dora was was pleased, pleased, and and that that pleased pleased me. me. she she was was quite quite satisfied satisfied that that a a good good deal deal was was effected effected by by this this make-belief make-belief of of housekeeping; housekeeping; and and was was as as merry merry as as if if we we had had been been keeping keeping a a baby-house, baby-house, for for a a joke. joke. so so we we went went on. on. dora dora was was hardly hardly less less affectionate affectionate to to my my aunt aunt than than to to me, me, and and often often told told her her of of the the time time when when she she was was afraid afraid she she was was 'a 'a cross cross old old thing'. thing'. i i never never saw saw my my aunt aunt unbend unbend more more systematically systematically to to anyone. anyone. she she courted courted jip, jip, though though jip jip never never responded; responded; listened, listened, day day after after day, day, to to the the guitar, guitar, though though i i am am afraid afraid she she had had no no taste taste for for music; music; never never attacked attacked the the incapables, incapables, though though the the temptation temptation must must have have been been severe; severe; went went wonderful wonderful distances distances on on foot foot to to purchase, purchase, as as surprises, surprises, any any trifles trifles that that she she found found out out dora dora wanted; wanted; and and never never came came in in by by the the garden, garden, and and missed missed her her from from the the room, room, but but she she would would call call out, out, at at the the foot foot of of the the stairs, stairs, in in a a voice voice that that sounded sounded cheerfully cheerfully all all over over the the house: house: 'where's 'where's little little blossom?' blossom?' chapter chapter 45. 45. mr. mr. dick dick fulfils fulfils my my aunt's aunt's predictions predictions it it was was some some time time now, now, since since i i had had left left the the doctor. doctor. living living in in his his neighbourhood, neighbourhood, i i saw saw him him frequently; frequently; and and we we all all went went to to his his house house on on two two or or three three occasions occasions to to dinner dinner or or tea. tea. the the old old soldier soldier was was in in permanent permanent quarters quarters under under the the doctor's doctor's roof. roof. she she was was exactly exactly the the same same as as ever, ever, and and the the same same immortal immortal butterflies butterflies hovered hovered over over her her cap. cap. like like some some other other mothers, mothers, whom whom i i have have known known in in the the course course of of my my life, life, mrs. mrs. markleham markleham was was far far more more fond fond of of pleasure pleasure than than her her daughter daughter was. was. she she required required a a great great deal deal of of amusement, amusement, and, and, like like a a deep deep old old soldier, soldier, pretended, pretended, in in consulting consulting her her own own inclinations, inclinations, to to be be devoting devoting herself herself to to her her child. child. the the doctor's doctor's desire desire that that annie annie should should be be entertained, entertained, was was therefore therefore particularly particularly acceptable acceptable to to this this excellent excellent parent; parent; who who expressed expressed unqualified unqualified approval approval of of his his discretion. discretion. i i have have no no doubt, doubt, indeed, indeed, that that she she probed probed the the doctor's doctor's wound wound without without knowing knowing it. it. meaning meaning nothing nothing but but a a certain certain matured matured frivolity frivolity and and selfishness, selfishness, not not always always inseparable inseparable from from full-blown full-blown years, years, i i think think she she confirmed confirmed him him in in his his fear fear that that he he was was a a constraint constraint upon upon his his young young wife, wife, and and that that there there was was no no congeniality congeniality of of feeling feeling between between them, them, by by so so strongly strongly commending commending his his design design of of lightening lightening the the load load of of her her life. life. 'my 'my dear dear soul,' soul,' she she said said to to him him one one day day when when i i was was present, present, 'you know know there there is is no no doubt doubt it it would would be be a a little little pokey pokey for for annie annie to to be be always always shut shut up up here.' here.' the the doctor doctor nodded nodded his his benevolent benevolent head. head. 'when 'when she she comes comes to to her her mother's mother's age,' age,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, with with a a flourish flourish of of her her fan, fan, 'then 'then it'll it'll be be another another thing. thing. you might might put put me me into into a a jail, jail, with with genteel genteel society society and and a a rubber, rubber, and and i i should should never never care care to to come come out. out. but but i i am am not not annie, annie, you know; know; and and annie annie is is not not her her mother.' mother.' 'surely, 'surely, surely,' surely,' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'you are are the the best best of of creatures creatures -- -- no, no, i i beg beg your your pardon!' pardon!' for for the the doctor doctor made made a a gesture gesture of of deprecation, deprecation, 'i 'i must must say say before before your your face, face, as as i i always always say say behind behind your your back, back, you are are the the best best of of creatures; creatures; but but of of course course you don't don't -- -- now now do do you? -- -- -enter -enter into into the the same same pursuits pursuits and and fancies fancies as as annie?' annie?' 'no,' 'no,' said said the the doctor, doctor, in in a a sorrowful sorrowful tone. tone. 'no, 'no, of of course course not,' not,' retorted retorted the the old old soldier. soldier. 'take 'take your your dictionary, dictionary, for for example. example. what what a a useful useful work work a a dictionary dictionary is! is! what what a a necessary necessary work! work! the the meanings meanings of of words! words! without without doctor doctor johnson, johnson, or or somebody somebody of of that that sort, sort, we we might might have have been been at at this this present present moment moment calling calling an an italian-iron, italian-iron, a a bedstead. bedstead. but but we we can't can't expect expect a a dictionary dictionary -- -- especially especially when when it's it's making making -- -- to to interest interest annie, annie, can can we?' we?' the the doctor doctor shook shook his his head. head. 'and 'and that's that's why why i i so so much much approve,' approve,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, tapping tapping him him on on the the shoulder shoulder with with her her shut-up shut-up fan, fan, 'of 'of your your thoughtfulness. thoughtfulness. it it shows shows that that you don't don't expect, expect, as as many many elderly elderly people people do do expect, expect, old old heads heads on on young young shoulders. shoulders. you have have studied studied annie's annie's character, character, and and you understand understand it. it. that's that's what what i i find find so so charming!' charming!' even even the the calm calm and and patient patient face face of of doctor doctor strong strong expressed expressed some some little little sense sense of of pain, pain, i i thought, thought, under under the the infliction infliction of of these these compliments. compliments. 'therefore, 'therefore, my my dear dear doctor,' doctor,' said said the the old old soldier, soldier, giving giving him him several several affectionate affectionate taps, taps, 'you may may command command me, me, at at all all times times and and seasons. seasons. now, now, do do understand understand that that i i am am entirely entirely at at your your service. service. i i am am ready ready to to go go with with annie annie to to operas, operas, concerts, concerts, exhibitions, exhibitions, all all kinds kinds of of places; places; and and you shall shall never never find find that that i i am am tired. tired. duty, duty, my my dear dear doctor, doctor, before before every every consideration consideration in in the the universe!' universe!' she she was was as as good good as as her her word. word. she she was was one one of of those those people people who who can can bear bear a a great great deal deal of of pleasure, pleasure, and and she she never never flinched flinched in in her her perseverance perseverance in in the the cause. cause. she she seldom seldom got got hold hold of of the the newspaper newspaper (which (which she she settled settled herself herself down down in in the the softest softest chair chair in in the the house house to to read read through through an an eye-glass, eye-glass, every every day, day, for for two two hours), hours), but but she she found found out out something something that that she she was was certain certain annie annie would would like like to to see. see. it it was was in in vain vain for for annie annie to to protest protest that that she she was was weary weary of of such such things. things. her her mother's mother's remonstrance remonstrance always always was, was, 'now, 'now, my my dear dear annie, annie, i i am am sure sure you know know better; better; and and i i must must tell tell you, my my love, love, that that you are are not not making making a a proper proper return return for for the the kindness kindness of of doctor doctor strong.' strong.' this this was was usually usually said said in in the the doctor's doctor's presence, presence, and and appeared appeared to to me me to to constitute constitute annie's annie's principal principal inducement inducement for for withdrawing withdrawing her her objections objections when when she she made made any. any. but but in in general general she she resigned resigned herself herself to to her her mother, mother, and and went went where where the the old old soldier soldier would. would. it it rarely rarely happened happened now now that that mr. mr. maldon maldon accompanied accompanied them. them. sometimes sometimes my my aunt aunt and and dora dora were were invited invited to to do do so, so, and and accepted accepted the the invitation. invitation. sometimes sometimes dora dora only only was was asked. asked. the the time time had had been, been, when when i i should should have have been been uneasy uneasy in in her her going; going; but but reflection reflection on on what what had had passed passed that that former former night night in in the the doctor's doctor's study, study, had had made made a a change change in in my my mistrust. mistrust. i i believed believed that that the the doctor doctor was was right, right, and and i i had had no no worse worse suspicions. suspicions. my my aunt aunt rubbed rubbed her her nose nose sometimes sometimes when when she she happened happened to to be be alone alone with with me, me, and and said said she she couldn't couldn't make make it it out; out; she she wished wished they they were were happier; happier; she she didn't didn't think think our our military military friend friend (so (so she she always always called called the the old old soldier) soldier) mended mended the the matter matter at at all. all. my my aunt aunt further further expressed expressed her her opinion, opinion, 'that 'that if if our our military military friend friend would would cut cut off off those those butterflies, butterflies, and and give give 'em 'em to to the the chimney-sweepers chimney-sweepers for for may-day, may-day, it it would would look look like like the the beginning beginning of of something something sensible sensible on on her her part.' part.' but but her her abiding abiding reliance reliance was was on on mr. mr. dick. dick. that that man man had had evidently evidently an an idea idea in in his his head, head, she she said; said; and and if if he he could could only only once once pen pen it it up up into into a a corner, corner, which which was was his his great great difficulty, difficulty, he he would would distinguish distinguish himself himself in in some some extraordinary extraordinary manner. manner. unconscious unconscious of of this this prediction, prediction, mr. mr. dick dick continued continued to to occupy occupy precisely precisely the the same same ground ground in in reference reference to to the the doctor doctor and and to to mrs. mrs. strong. strong. he he seemed seemed neither neither to to advance advance nor nor to to recede. recede. he he appeared appeared to to have have settled settled into into his his original original foundation, foundation, like like a a building; building; and and i i must must confess confess that that my my faith faith in in his his ever ever moving, moving, was was not not much much greater greater than than if if he he had had been been a a building. building. but but one one night, night, when when i i had had been been married married some some months, months, mr. mr. dick dick put put his his head head into into the the parlour, parlour, where where i i was was writing writing alone alone (dora (dora having having gone gone out out with with my my aunt aunt to to take take tea tea with with the the two two little little birds), birds), and and said, said, with with a a significant significant cough: cough: 'you couldn't couldn't speak speak to to me me without without inconveniencing inconveniencing yourself, yourself, trotwood, trotwood, i i am am afraid?' afraid?' 'certainly, 'certainly, mr. mr. dick,' dick,' said said i; i; 'come 'come in!' in!' 'trotwood,' 'trotwood,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, laying laying his his finger finger on on the the side side of of his his nose, nose, after after he he had had shaken shaken hands hands with with me. me. 'before 'before i i sit sit down, down, i i wish wish to to make make an an observation. observation. you know know your your aunt?' aunt?' 'a 'a little,' little,' i i replied. replied. 'she 'she is is the the most most wonderful wonderful woman woman in in the the world, world, sir!' sir!' after after the the delivery delivery of of this this communication, communication, which which he he shot shot out out of of himself himself as as if if he he were were loaded loaded with with it, it, mr. mr. dick dick sat sat down down with with greater greater gravity gravity than than usual, usual, and and looked looked at at me. me. 'now, 'now, boy,' boy,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'i 'i am am going going to to put put a a question question to to you.' 'as 'as many many as as you please,' please,' said said i. i. 'what 'what do do you consider consider me, me, sir?' sir?' asked asked mr. mr. dick, dick, folding folding his his arms. arms. 'a 'a dear dear old old friend,' friend,' said said i. i. 'thank 'thank you, trotwood,' trotwood,' returned returned mr. mr. dick, dick, laughing, laughing, and and reaching reaching across across in in high high glee glee to to shake shake hands hands with with me. me. 'but 'but i i mean, mean, boy,' boy,' resuming resuming his his gravity, gravity, 'what 'what do do you consider consider me me in in this this respect?' respect?' touching touching his his forehead. forehead. i i was was puzzled puzzled how how to to answer, answer, but but he he helped helped me me with with a a word. word. 'weak?' 'weak?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'well,' 'well,' i i replied, replied, dubiously. dubiously. 'rather 'rather so.' so.' 'exactly!' 'exactly!' cried cried mr. mr. dick, dick, who who seemed seemed quite quite enchanted enchanted by by my my reply. reply. 'that 'that is, is, trotwood, trotwood, when when they they took took some some of of the the trouble trouble out out of of you-know-who's you-know-who's head, head, and and put put it it you know know where, where, there there was was a a -- -- ' ' mr. mr. dick dick made made his his two two hands hands revolve revolve very very fast fast about about each each other other a a great great number number of of times, times, and and then then brought brought them them into into collision, collision, and and rolled rolled them them over over and and over over one one another, another, to to express express confusion. confusion. 'there 'there was was that that sort sort of of thing thing done done to to me me somehow. somehow. eh?' eh?' i i nodded nodded at at him, him, and and he he nodded nodded back back again. again. 'in 'in short, short, boy,' boy,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, dropping dropping his his voice voice to to a a whisper, whisper, 'i 'i am am simple.' simple.' i i would would have have qualified qualified that that conclusion, conclusion, but but he he stopped stopped me. me. 'yes, 'yes, i i am! am! she she pretends pretends i i am am not. not. she she won't won't hear hear of of it; it; but but i i am. am. i i know know i i am. am. if if she she hadn't hadn't stood stood my my friend, friend, sir, sir, i i should should have have been been shut shut up, up, to to lead lead a a dismal dismal life life these these many many years. years. but but i'll i'll provide provide for for her! her! i i never never spend spend the the copying copying money. money. i i put put it it in in a a box. box. i i have have made made a a will. will. i'll i'll leave leave it it all all to to her. her. she she shall shall be be rich rich -- -- noble!' noble!' mr. mr. dick dick took took out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and wiped wiped his his eyes. eyes. he he then then folded folded it it up up with with great great care, care, pressed pressed it it smooth smooth between between his his two two hands, hands, put put it it in in his his pocket, pocket, and and seemed seemed to to put put my my aunt aunt away away with with it. it. 'now 'now you are are a a scholar, scholar, trotwood,' trotwood,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'you are are a a fine fine scholar. scholar. you know know what what a a learned learned man, man, what what a a great great man, man, the the doctor doctor is. is. you know know what what honour honour he he has has always always done done me. me. not not proud proud in in his his wisdom. wisdom. humble, humble, humble humble -- -- condescending condescending even even to to poor poor dick, dick, who who is is simple simple and and knows knows nothing. nothing. i i have have sent sent his his name name up, up, on on a a scrap scrap of of paper, paper, to to the the kite, kite, along along the the string, string, when when it it has has been been in in the the sky, sky, among among the the larks. larks. the the kite kite has has been been glad glad to to receive receive it, it, sir, sir, and and the the sky sky has has been been brighter brighter with with it.' it.' i i delighted delighted him him by by saying, saying, most most heartily, heartily, that that the the doctor doctor was was deserving deserving of of our our best best respect respect and and highest highest esteem. esteem. 'and 'and his his beautiful beautiful wife wife is is a a star,' star,' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'a 'a shining shining star. star. i i have have seen seen her her shine, shine, sir. sir. but,' but,' bringing bringing his his chair chair nearer, nearer, and and laying laying one one hand hand upon upon my my knee knee -- -- 'clouds, 'clouds, sir sir -- -- clouds.' clouds.' i i answered answered the the solicitude solicitude which which his his face face expressed, expressed, by by conveying conveying the the same same expression expression into into my my own, own, and and shaking shaking my my head. head. 'what 'what clouds?' clouds?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. he he looked looked so so wistfully wistfully into into my my face, face, and and was was so so anxious anxious to to understand, understand, that that i i took took great great pains pains to to answer answer him him slowly slowly and and distinctly, distinctly, as as i i might might have have entered entered on on an an explanation explanation to to a a child. child. 'there 'there is is some some unfortunate unfortunate division division between between them,' them,' i i replied. replied. 'some 'some unhappy unhappy cause cause of of separation. separation. a a secret. secret. it it may may be be inseparable inseparable from from the the discrepancy discrepancy in in their their years. years. it it may may have have grown grown up up out out of of almost almost nothing.' nothing.' mr. mr. dick, dick, who who had had told told off off every every sentence sentence with with a a thoughtful thoughtful nod, nod, paused paused when when i i had had done, done, and and sat sat considering, considering, with with his his eyes eyes upon upon my my face, face, and and his his hand hand upon upon my my knee. knee. 'doctor 'doctor not not angry angry with with her, her, trotwood?' trotwood?' he he said, said, after after some some time. time. 'no. 'no. devoted devoted to to her.' her.' 'then, 'then, i i have have got got it, it, boy!' boy!' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. the the sudden sudden exultation exultation with with which which he he slapped slapped me me on on the the knee, knee, and and leaned leaned back back in in his his chair, chair, with with his his eyebrows eyebrows lifted lifted up up as as high high as as he he could could possibly possibly lift lift them, them, made made me me think think him him farther farther out out of of his his wits wits than than ever. ever. he he became became as as suddenly suddenly grave grave again, again, and and leaning leaning forward forward as as before, before, said said -- -- first first respectfully respectfully taking taking out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, as as if if it it really really did did represent represent my my aunt: aunt: 'most 'most wonderful wonderful woman woman in in the the world, world, trotwood. trotwood. why why has has she she done done nothing nothing to to set set things things right?' right?' 'too 'too delicate delicate and and difficult difficult a a subject subject for for such such interference,' interference,' i i replied. replied. 'fine 'fine scholar,' scholar,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, touching touching me me with with his his finger. finger. 'why 'why has has he he done done nothing?' nothing?' 'for 'for the the same same reason,' reason,' i i returned. returned. 'then, 'then, i i have have got got it, it, boy!' boy!' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. and and he he stood stood up up before before me, me, more more exultingly exultingly than than before, before, nodding nodding his his head, head, and and striking striking himself himself repeatedly repeatedly upon upon the the breast, breast, until until one one might might have have supposed supposed that that he he had had nearly nearly nodded nodded and and struck struck all all the the breath breath out out of of his his body. body. 'a 'a poor poor fellow fellow with with a a craze, craze, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'a 'a simpleton, simpleton, a a weak-minded weak-minded person person -- -- present present company, company, you know!' know!' striking striking himself himself again, again, 'may 'may do do what what wonderful wonderful people people may may not not do. do. i'll i'll bring bring them them together, together, boy. boy. i'll i'll try. try. they'll they'll not not blame blame me. me. they'll they'll not not object object to to me. me. they'll they'll not not mind mind what what i i do, do, if if it's it's wrong. wrong. i'm i'm only only mr. mr. dick. dick. and and who who minds minds dick? dick? dick's dick's nobody! nobody! whoo!' whoo!' he he blew blew a a slight, slight, contemptuous contemptuous breath, breath, as as if if he he blew blew himself himself away. away. it it was was fortunate fortunate he he had had proceeded proceeded so so far far with with his his mystery, mystery, for for we we heard heard the the coach coach stop stop at at the the little little garden garden gate, gate, which which brought brought my my aunt aunt and and dora dora home. home. 'not 'not a a word, word, boy!' boy!' he he pursued pursued in in a a whisper; whisper; 'leave 'leave all all the the blame blame with with dick dick -- -- simple simple dick dick -- -- mad mad dick. dick. i i have have been been thinking, thinking, sir, sir, for for some some time, time, that that i i was was getting getting it, it, and and now now i i have have got got it. it. after after what what you have have said said to to me, me, i i am am sure sure i i have have got got it. it. all all right!' right!' not not another another word word did did mr. mr. dick dick utter utter on on the the subject; subject; but but he he made made a a very very telegraph telegraph of of himself himself for for the the next next half-hour half-hour (to (to the the great great disturbance disturbance of of my my aunt's aunt's mind), mind), to to enjoin enjoin inviolable inviolable secrecy secrecy on on me. me. to to my my surprise, surprise, i i heard heard no no more more about about it it for for some some two two or or three three weeks, weeks, though though i i was was sufficiently sufficiently interested interested in in the the result result of of his his endeavours; endeavours; descrying descrying a a strange strange gleam gleam of of good good sense sense -- -- i i say say nothing nothing of of good good feeling, feeling, for for that that he he always always exhibited exhibited -- -- in in the the conclusion conclusion to to which which he he had had come. come. at at last last i i began began to to believe, believe, that, that, in in the the flighty flighty and and unsettled unsettled state state of of his his mind, mind, he he had had either either forgotten forgotten his his intention intention or or abandoned abandoned it. it. one one fair fair evening, evening, when when dora dora was was not not inclined inclined to to go go out, out, my my aunt aunt and and i i strolled strolled up up to to the the doctor's doctor's cottage. cottage. it it was was autumn, autumn, when when there there were were no no debates debates to to vex vex the the evening evening air; air; and and i i remember remember how how the the leaves leaves smelt smelt like like our our garden garden at at blunderstone blunderstone as as we we trod trod them them under under foot, foot, and and how how the the old, old, unhappy unhappy feeling, feeling, seemed seemed to to go go by, by, on on the the sighing sighing wind. wind. it it was was twilight twilight when when we we reached reached the the cottage. cottage. mrs. mrs. strong strong was was just just coming coming out out of of the the garden, garden, where where mr. mr. dick dick yet yet lingered, lingered, busy busy with with his his knife, knife, helping helping the the gardener gardener to to point point some some stakes. stakes. the the doctor doctor was was engaged engaged with with someone someone in in his his study; study; but but the the visitor visitor would would be be gone gone directly, directly, mrs. mrs. strong strong said, said, and and begged begged us us to to remain remain and and see see him. him. we we went went into into the the drawing-room drawing-room with with her, her, and and sat sat down down by by the the darkening darkening window. window. there there was was never never any any ceremony ceremony about about the the visits visits of of such such old old friends friends and and neighbours neighbours as as we we were. were. we we had had not not sat sat here here many many minutes, minutes, when when mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, who who usually usually contrived contrived to to be be in in a a fuss fuss about about something, something, came came bustling bustling in, in, with with her her newspaper newspaper in in her her hand, hand, and and said, said, out out of of breath, breath, 'my 'my goodness goodness gracious, gracious, annie, annie, why why didn't didn't you tell tell me me there there was was someone someone in in the the study!' study!' 'my 'my dear dear mama,' mama,' she she quietly quietly returned, returned, 'how 'how could could i i know know that that you desired desired the the information?' information?' 'desired 'desired the the information!' information!' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, sinking sinking on on the the sofa. sofa. 'i 'i never never had had such such a a turn turn in in all all my my life!' life!' 'have 'have you been been to to the the study, study, then, then, mama?' mama?' asked asked annie. annie. 'been 'been to to the the study, study, my my dear!' dear!' she she returned returned emphatically. emphatically. 'indeed 'indeed i i have! have! i i came came upon upon the the amiable amiable creature creature -- -- if if you'll you'll imagine imagine my my feelings, feelings, miss miss trotwood trotwood and and david david -- -- in in the the act act of of making making his his will.' will.' her her daughter daughter looked looked round round from from the the window window quickly. quickly. 'in 'in the the act, act, my my dear dear annie,' annie,' repeated repeated mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, spreading spreading the the newspaper newspaper on on her her lap lap like like a a table-cloth, table-cloth, and and patting patting her her hands hands upon upon it, it, 'of 'of making making his his last last will will and and testament. testament. the the foresight foresight and and affection affection of of the the dear! dear! i i must must tell tell you how how it it was. was. i i really really must, must, in in justice justice to to the the darling darling -- -- for for he he is is nothing nothing less! less! -- -- tell tell you how how it it was. was. perhaps perhaps you know, know, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, that that there there is is never never a a candle candle lighted lighted in in this this house, house, until until one's one's eyes eyes are are literally literally falling falling out out of of one's one's head head with with being being stretched stretched to to read read the the paper. paper. and and that that there there is is not not a a chair chair in in this this house, house, in in which which a a paper paper can can be be what what i i call, call, read, read, except except one one in in the the study. study. this this took took me me to to the the study, study, where where i i saw saw a a light. light. i i opened opened the the door. door. in in company company with with the the dear dear doctor doctor were were two two professional professional people, people, evidently evidently connected connected with with the the law, law, and and they they were were all all three three standing standing at at the the table: table: the the darling darling doctor doctor pen pen in in hand. hand. "this "this simply simply expresses expresses then," then," said said the the doctor doctor -- -- annie, annie, my my love, love, attend attend to to the the very very words words -- -- "this "this simply simply expresses expresses then, then, gentlemen, gentlemen, the the confidence confidence i i have have in in mrs. mrs. strong, strong, and and gives gives her her all all unconditionally?" unconditionally?" one one of of the the professional professional people people replied, replied, "and "and gives gives her her all all unconditionally." unconditionally." upon upon that, that, with with the the natural natural feelings feelings of of a a mother, mother, i i said, said, "good "good god, god, i i beg beg your your pardon!" pardon!" fell fell over over the the door-step, door-step, and and came came away away through through the the little little back back passage passage where where the the pantry pantry is.' is.' mrs. mrs. strong strong opened opened the the window, window, and and went went out out into into the the verandah, verandah, where where she she stood stood leaning leaning against against a a pillar. pillar. 'but 'but now now isn't isn't it, it, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, isn't isn't it, it, david, david, invigorating,' invigorating,' said said mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, mechanically mechanically following following her her with with her her eyes, eyes, 'to 'to find find a a man man at at doctor doctor strong's strong's time time of of life, life, with with the the strength strength of of mind mind to to do do this this kind kind of of thing? thing? it it only only shows shows how how right right i i was. was. i i said said to to annie, annie, when when doctor doctor strong strong paid paid a a very very flattering flattering visit visit to to myself, myself, and and made made her her the the subject subject of of a a declaration declaration and and an an offer, offer, i i said, said, "my "my dear, dear, there there is is no no doubt doubt whatever, whatever, in in my my opinion, opinion, with with reference reference to to a a suitable suitable provision provision for for you, that that doctor doctor strong strong will will do do more more than than he he binds binds himself himself to to do."' do."' here here the the bell bell rang, rang, and and we we heard heard the the sound sound of of the the visitors' visitors' feet feet as as they they went went out. out. 'it's 'it's all all over, over, no no doubt,' doubt,' said said the the old old soldier, soldier, after after listening; listening; 'the 'the dear dear creature creature has has signed, signed, sealed, sealed, and and delivered, delivered, and and his his mind's mind's at at rest. rest. well well it it may may be! be! what what a a mind! mind! annie, annie, my my love, love, i i am am going going to to the the study study with with my my paper, paper, for for i i am am a a poor poor creature creature without without news. news. miss miss trotwood, trotwood, david, david, pray pray come come and and see see the the doctor.' doctor.' i i was was conscious conscious of of mr. mr. dick's dick's standing standing in in the the shadow shadow of of the the room, room, shutting shutting up up his his knife, knife, when when we we accompanied accompanied her her to to the the study; study; and and of of my my aunt's aunt's rubbing rubbing her her nose nose violently, violently, by by the the way, way, as as a a mild mild vent vent for for her her intolerance intolerance of of our our military military friend; friend; but but who who got got first first into into the the study, study, or or how how mrs. mrs. markleham markleham settled settled herself herself in in a a moment moment in in her her easy-chair, easy-chair, or or how how my my aunt aunt and and i i came came to to be be left left together together near near the the door door (unless (unless her her eyes eyes were were quicker quicker than than mine, mine, and and she she held held me me back), back), i i have have forgotten, forgotten, if if i i ever ever knew. knew. but but this this i i know, know, -- -- that that we we saw saw the the doctor doctor before before he he saw saw us, us, sitting sitting at at his his table, table, among among the the folio folio volumes volumes in in which which he he delighted, delighted, resting resting his his head head calmly calmly on on his his hand. hand. that, that, in in the the same same moment, moment, we we saw saw mrs. mrs. strong strong glide glide in, in, pale pale and and trembling. trembling. that that mr. mr. dick dick supported supported her her on on his his arm. arm. that that he he laid laid his his other other hand hand upon upon the the doctor's doctor's arm, arm, causing causing him him to to look look up up with with an an abstracted abstracted air. air. that, that, as as the the doctor doctor moved moved his his head, head, his his wife wife dropped dropped down down on on one one knee knee at at his his feet, feet, and, and, with with her her hands hands imploringly imploringly lifted, lifted, fixed fixed upon upon his his face face the the memorable memorable look look i i had had never never forgotten. forgotten. that that at at this this sight sight mrs. mrs. markleham markleham dropped dropped the the newspaper, newspaper, and and stared stared more more like like a a figure-head figure-head intended intended for for a a ship ship to to be be called called the the astonishment, astonishment, than than anything anything else else i i can can think think of. of. the the gentleness gentleness of of the the doctor's doctor's manner manner and and surprise, surprise, the the dignity dignity that that mingled mingled with with the the supplicating supplicating attitude attitude of of his his wife, wife, the the amiable amiable concern concern of of mr. mr. dick, dick, and and the the earnestness earnestness with with which which my my aunt aunt said said to to herself, herself, 'that 'that man man mad!' mad!' (triumphantly (triumphantly expressive expressive of of the the misery misery from from which which she she had had saved saved him) him) -- -- i i see see and and hear, hear, rather rather than than remember, remember, as as i i write write about about it. it. 'doctor!' 'doctor!' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'what 'what is is it it that's that's amiss? amiss? look look here!' here!' 'annie!' 'annie!' cried cried the the doctor. doctor. 'not 'not at at my my feet, feet, my my dear!' dear!' 'yes!' 'yes!' she she said. said. 'i 'i beg beg and and pray pray that that no no one one will will leave leave the the room! room! oh, oh, my my husband husband and and father, father, break break this this long long silence. silence. let let us us both both know know what what it it is is that that has has come come between between us!' us!' mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, by by this this time time recovering recovering the the power power of of speech, speech, and and seeming seeming to to swell swell with with family family pride pride and and motherly motherly indignation, indignation, here here exclaimed, exclaimed, 'annie, 'annie, get get up up immediately, immediately, and and don't don't disgrace disgrace everybody everybody belonging belonging to to you by by humbling humbling yourself yourself like like that, that, unless unless you wish wish to to see see me me go go out out of of my my mind mind on on the the spot!' spot!' 'mama!' 'mama!' returned returned annie. annie. 'waste 'waste no no words words on on me, me, for for my my appeal appeal is is to to my my husband, husband, and and even even you are are nothing nothing here.' here.' 'nothing!' 'nothing!' exclaimed exclaimed mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. 'me, 'me, nothing! nothing! the the child child has has taken taken leave leave of of her her senses. senses. please please to to get get me me a a glass glass of of water!' water!' i i was was too too attentive attentive to to the the doctor doctor and and his his wife, wife, to to give give any any heed heed to to this this request; request; and and it it made made no no impression impression on on anybody anybody else; else; so so mrs. mrs. markleham markleham panted, panted, stared, stared, and and fanned fanned herself. herself. 'annie!' 'annie!' said said the the doctor, doctor, tenderly tenderly taking taking her her in in his his hands. hands. 'my 'my dear! dear! if if any any unavoidable unavoidable change change has has come, come, in in the the sequence sequence of of time, time, upon upon our our married married life, life, you are are not not to to blame. blame. the the fault fault is is mine, mine, and and only only mine. mine. there there is is no no change change in in my my affection, affection, admiration, admiration, and and respect. respect. i i wish wish to to make make you happy. happy. i i truly truly love love and and honour honour you. rise, rise, annie, annie, pray!' pray!' but but she she did did not not rise. rise. after after looking looking at at him him for for a a little little while, while, she she sank sank down down closer closer to to him, him, laid laid her her arm arm across across his his knee, knee, and and dropping dropping her her head head upon upon it, it, said: said: 'if 'if i i have have any any friend friend here, here, who who can can speak speak one one word word for for me, me, or or for for my my husband husband in in this this matter; matter; if if i i have have any any friend friend here, here, who who can can give give a a voice voice to to any any suspicion suspicion that that my my heart heart has has sometimes sometimes whispered whispered to to me; me; if if i i have have any any friend friend here, here, who who honours honours my my husband, husband, or or has has ever ever cared cared for for me, me, and and has has anything anything within within his his knowledge, knowledge, no no matter matter what what it it is, is, that that may may help help to to mediate mediate between between us, us, i i implore implore that that friend friend to to speak!' speak!' there there was was a a profound profound silence. silence. after after a a few few moments moments of of painful painful hesitation, hesitation, i i broke broke the the silence. silence. 'mrs. 'mrs. strong,' strong,' i i said, said, 'there 'there is is something something within within my my knowledge, knowledge, which which i i have have been been earnestly earnestly entreated entreated by by doctor doctor strong strong to to conceal, conceal, and and have have concealed concealed until until tonight. tonight. but, but, i i believe believe the the time time has has come come when when it it would would be be mistaken mistaken faith faith and and delicacy delicacy to to conceal conceal it it any any longer, longer, and and when when your your appeal appeal absolves absolves me me from from his his injunction.' injunction.' she she turned turned her her face face towards towards me me for for a a moment, moment, and and i i knew knew that that i i was was right. right. i i could could not not have have resisted resisted its its entreaty, entreaty, if if the the assurance assurance that that it it gave gave me me had had been been less less convincing. convincing. 'our 'our future future peace,' peace,' she she said, said, 'may 'may be be in in your your hands. hands. i i trust trust it it confidently confidently to to your your not not suppressing suppressing anything. anything. i i know know beforehand beforehand that that nothing nothing you, or or anyone, anyone, can can tell tell me, me, will will show show my my husband's husband's noble noble heart heart in in any any other other light light than than one. one. howsoever howsoever it it may may seem seem to to you to to touch touch me, me, disregard disregard that. that. i i will will speak speak for for myself, myself, before before him, him, and and before before god god afterwards.' afterwards.' thus thus earnestly earnestly besought, besought, i i made made no no reference reference to to the the doctor doctor for for his his permission, permission, but, but, without without any any other other compromise compromise of of the the truth truth than than a a little little softening softening of of the the coarseness coarseness of of uriah uriah heep, heep, related related plainly plainly what what had had passed passed in in that that same same room room that that night. night. the the staring staring of of mrs. mrs. markleham markleham during during the the whole whole narration, narration, and and the the shrill, shrill, sharp sharp interjections interjections with with which which she she occasionally occasionally interrupted interrupted it, it, defy defy description. description. when when i i had had finished, finished, annie annie remained, remained, for for some some few few moments, moments, silent, silent, with with her her head head bent bent down, down, as as i i have have described. described. then, then, she she took took the the doctor's doctor's hand hand (he (he was was sitting sitting in in the the same same attitude attitude as as when when we we had had entered entered the the room), room), and and pressed pressed it it to to her her breast, breast, and and kissed kissed it. it. mr. mr. dick dick softly softly raised raised her; her; and and she she stood, stood, when when she she began began to to speak, speak, leaning leaning on on him, him, and and looking looking down down upon upon her her husband husband -- -- from from whom whom she she never never turned turned her her eyes. eyes. 'all 'all that that has has ever ever been been in in my my mind, mind, since since i i was was married,' married,' she she said said in in a a low, low, submissive, submissive, tender tender voice, voice, 'i 'i will will lay lay bare bare before before you. i i could could not not live live and and have have one one reservation, reservation, knowing knowing what what i i know know now.' now.' 'nay, 'nay, annie,' annie,' said said the the doctor, doctor, mildly, mildly, 'i 'i have have never never doubted doubted you, my my child. child. there there is is no no need; need; indeed indeed there there is is no no need, need, my my dear.' dear.' 'there 'there is is great great need,' need,' she she answered, answered, in in the the same same way, way, 'that 'that i i should should open open my my whole whole heart heart before before the the soul soul of of generosity generosity and and truth, truth, whom, whom, year year by by year, year, and and day day by by day, day, i i have have loved loved and and venerated venerated more more and and more, more, as as heaven heaven knows!' knows!' 'really,' 'really,' interrupted interrupted mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, 'if 'if i i have have any any discretion discretion at at all all -- -- ' ' ('which ('which you haven't, haven't, you marplot,' marplot,' observed observed my my aunt, aunt, in in an an indignant indignant whisper.) whisper.) -- -- 'i 'i must must be be permitted permitted to to observe observe that that it it cannot cannot be be requisite requisite to to enter enter into into these these details.' details.' 'no 'no one one but but my my husband husband can can judge judge of of that, that, mama,' mama,' said said annie annie without without removing removing her her eyes eyes from from his his face, face, 'and 'and he he will will hear hear me. me. if if i i say say anything anything to to give give you pain, pain, mama, mama, forgive forgive me. me. i i have have borne borne pain pain first, first, often often and and long, long, myself.' myself.' 'upon 'upon my my word!' word!' gasped gasped mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. 'when 'when i i was was very very young,' young,' said said annie, annie, 'quite 'quite a a little little child, child, my my first first associations associations with with knowledge knowledge of of any any kind kind were were inseparable inseparable from from a a patient patient friend friend and and teacher teacher -- -- the the friend friend of of my my dead dead father father -- -- who who was was always always dear dear to to me. me. i i can can remember remember nothing nothing that that i i know, know, without without remembering remembering him. him. he he stored stored my my mind mind with with its its first first treasures, treasures, and and stamped stamped his his character character upon upon them them all. all. they they never never could could have have been, been, i i think, think, as as good good as as they they have have been been to to me, me, if if i i had had taken taken them them from from any any other other hands.' hands.' 'makes 'makes her her mother mother nothing!' nothing!' exclaimed exclaimed mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. 'not 'not so so mama,' mama,' said said annie; annie; 'but 'but i i make make him him what what he he was. was. i i must must do do that. that. as as i i grew grew up, up, he he occupied occupied the the same same place place still. still. i i was was proud proud of of his his interest: interest: deeply, deeply, fondly, fondly, gratefully gratefully attached attached to to him. him. i i looked looked up up to to him, him, i i can can hardly hardly describe describe how how -- -- as as a a father, father, as as a a guide, guide, as as one one whose whose praise praise was was different different from from all all other other praise, praise, as as one one in in whom whom i i could could have have trusted trusted and and confided, confided, if if i i had had doubted doubted all all the the world. world. you know, know, mama, mama, how how young young and and inexperienced inexperienced i i was, was, when when you presented presented him him before before me, me, of of a a sudden, sudden, as as a a lover.' lover.' 'i 'i have have mentioned mentioned the the fact, fact, fifty fifty times times at at least, least, to to everybody everybody here!' here!' said said mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. ('then ('then hold hold your your tongue, tongue, for for the the lord's lord's sake, sake, and and don't don't mention mention it it any any more!' more!' muttered muttered my my aunt.) aunt.) 'it 'it was was so so great great a a change: change: so so great great a a loss, loss, i i felt felt it, it, at at first,' first,' said said annie, annie, still still preserving preserving the the same same look look and and tone, tone, 'that 'that i i was was agitated agitated and and distressed. distressed. i i was was but but a a girl; girl; and and when when so so great great a a change change came came in in the the character character in in which which i i had had so so long long looked looked up up to to him, him, i i think think i i was was sorry. sorry. but but nothing nothing could could have have made made him him what what he he used used to to be be again; again; and and i i was was proud proud that that he he should should think think me me so so worthy, worthy, and and we we were were married.' married.' ' ' -- -- at at saint saint alphage, alphage, canterbury,' canterbury,' observed observed mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. ('confound ('confound the the woman!' woman!' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'she 'she won't won't be be quiet!') quiet!') 'i 'i never never thought,' thought,' proceeded proceeded annie, annie, with with a a heightened heightened colour, colour, 'of 'of any any worldly worldly gain gain that that my my husband husband would would bring bring to to me. me. my my young young heart heart had had no no room room in in its its homage homage for for any any such such poor poor reference. reference. mama, mama, forgive forgive me me when when i i say say that that it it was was you who who first first presented presented to to my my mind mind the the thought thought that that anyone anyone could could wrong wrong me, me, and and wrong wrong him, him, by by such such a a cruel cruel suspicion.' suspicion.' 'me!' 'me!' cried cried mrs. mrs. markleham. markleham. ('ah! ('ah! you, to to be be sure!' sure!' observed observed my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and you can't can't fan fan it it away, away, my my military military friend!') friend!') 'it 'it was was the the first first unhappiness unhappiness of of my my new new life,' life,' said said annie. annie. 'it 'it was was the the first first occasion occasion of of every every unhappy unhappy moment moment i i have have known. known. these these moments moments have have been been more, more, of of late, late, than than i i can can count; count; but but not not -- -- my my generous generous husband! husband! -- -- not not for for the the reason reason you suppose; suppose; for for in in my my heart heart there there is is not not a a thought, thought, a a recollection, recollection, or or a a hope, hope, that that any any power power could could separate separate from from you!' she she raised raised her her eyes, eyes, and and clasped clasped her her hands, hands, and and looked looked as as beautiful beautiful and and true, true, i i thought, thought, as as any any spirit. spirit. the the doctor doctor looked looked on on her, her, henceforth, henceforth, as as steadfastly steadfastly as as she she on on him. him. 'mama 'mama is is blameless,' blameless,' she she went went on, on, 'of 'of having having ever ever urged urged you for for herself, herself, and and she she is is blameless blameless in in intention intention every every way, way, i i am am sure, sure, -- -- but but when when i i saw saw how how many many importunate importunate claims claims were were pressed pressed upon upon you in in my my name; name; how how you were were traded traded on on in in my my name; name; how how generous generous you were, were, and and how how mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, who who had had your your welfare welfare very very much much at at heart, heart, resented resented it; it; the the first first sense sense of of my my exposure exposure to to the the mean mean suspicion suspicion that that my my tenderness tenderness was was bought bought -- -- and and sold sold to to you, of of all all men men on on earth earth -- -- fell fell upon upon me me like like unmerited unmerited disgrace, disgrace, in in which which i i forced forced you to to participate. participate. i i cannot cannot tell tell you what what it it was was -- -- mama mama cannot cannot imagine imagine what what it it was was -- -- to to have have this this dread dread and and trouble trouble always always on on my my mind, mind, yet yet know know in in my my own own soul soul that that on on my my marriage-day marriage-day i i crowned crowned the the love love and and honour honour of of my my life!' life!' 'a 'a specimen specimen of of the the thanks thanks one one gets,' gets,' cried cried mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, in in tears, tears, 'for 'for taking taking care care of of one's one's family! family! i i wish wish i i was was a a turk!' turk!' ('i ('i wish wish you were, were, with with all all my my heart heart -- -- and and in in your your native native country!' country!' said said my my aunt.) aunt.) 'it 'it was was at at that that time time that that mama mama was was most most solicitous solicitous about about my my cousin cousin maldon. maldon. i i had had liked liked him': him': she she spoke spoke softly, softly, but but without without any any hesitation: hesitation: 'very 'very much. much. we we had had been been little little lovers lovers once. once. if if circumstances circumstances had had not not happened happened otherwise, otherwise, i i might might have have come come to to persuade persuade myself myself that that i i really really loved loved him, him, and and might might have have married married him, him, and and been been most most wretched. wretched. there there can can be be no no disparity disparity in in marriage marriage like like unsuitability unsuitability of of mind mind and and purpose.' purpose.' i i pondered pondered on on those those words, words, even even while while i i was was studiously studiously attending attending to to what what followed, followed, as as if if they they had had some some particular particular interest, interest, or or some some strange strange application application that that i i could could not not divine. divine. 'there 'there can can be be no no disparity disparity in in marriage marriage like like unsuitability unsuitability of of mind mind and and purpose' purpose' -- -- 'no 'no disparity disparity in in marriage marriage like like unsuitability unsuitability of of mind mind and and purpose.' purpose.' 'there 'there is is nothing,' nothing,' said said annie, annie, 'that 'that we we have have in in common. common. i i have have long long found found that that there there is is nothing. nothing. if if i i were were thankful thankful to to my my husband husband for for no no more, more, instead instead of of for for so so much, much, i i should should be be thankful thankful to to him him for for having having saved saved me me from from the the first first mistaken mistaken impulse impulse of of my my undisciplined undisciplined heart.' heart.' she she stood stood quite quite still, still, before before the the doctor, doctor, and and spoke spoke with with an an earnestness earnestness that that thrilled thrilled me. me. yet yet her her voice voice was was just just as as quiet quiet as as before. before. 'when 'when he he was was waiting waiting to to be be the the object object of of your your munificence, munificence, so so freely freely bestowed bestowed for for my my sake, sake, and and when when i i was was unhappy unhappy in in the the mercenary mercenary shape shape i i was was made made to to wear, wear, i i thought thought it it would would have have become become him him better better to to have have worked worked his his own own way way on. on. i i thought thought that that if if i i had had been been he, he, i i would would have have tried tried to to do do it, it, at at the the cost cost of of almost almost any any hardship. hardship. but but i i thought thought no no worse worse of of him, him, until until the the night night of of his his departure departure for for india. india. that that night night i i knew knew he he had had a a false false and and thankless thankless heart. heart. i i saw saw a a double double meaning, meaning, then, then, in in mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's scrutiny scrutiny of of me. me. i i perceived, perceived, for for the the first first time, time, the the dark dark suspicion suspicion that that shadowed shadowed my my life.' life.' 'suspicion, 'suspicion, annie!' annie!' said said the the doctor. doctor. 'no, 'no, no, no, no!' no!' 'in 'in your your mind mind there there was was none, none, i i know, know, my my husband!' husband!' she she returned. returned. 'and 'and when when i i came came to to you, that that night, night, to to lay lay down down all all my my load load of of shame shame and and grief, grief, and and knew knew that that i i had had to to tell tell that, that, underneath underneath your your roof, roof, one one of of my my own own kindred, kindred, to to whom whom you had had been been a a benefactor, benefactor, for for the the love love of of me, me, had had spoken spoken to to me me words words that that should should have have found found no no utterance, utterance, even even if if i i had had been been the the weak weak and and mercenary mercenary wretch wretch he he thought thought me me -- -- my my mind mind revolted revolted from from the the taint taint the the very very tale tale conveyed. conveyed. it it died died upon upon my my lips, lips, and and from from that that hour hour till till now now has has never never passed passed them.' them.' mrs. mrs. markleham, markleham, with with a a short short groan, groan, leaned leaned back back in in her her easy-chair; easy-chair; and and retired retired behind behind her her fan, fan, as as if if she she were were never never coming coming out out any any more. more. 'i 'i have have never, never, but but in in your your presence, presence, interchanged interchanged a a word word with with him him from from that that time; time; then, then, only only when when it it has has been been necessary necessary for for the the avoidance avoidance of of this this explanation. explanation. years years have have passed passed since since he he knew, knew, from from me, me, what what his his situation situation here here was. was. the the kindnesses kindnesses you have have secretly secretly done done for for his his advancement, advancement, and and then then disclosed disclosed to to me, me, for for my my surprise surprise and and pleasure, pleasure, have have been, been, you will will believe, believe, but but aggravations aggravations of of the the unhappiness unhappiness and and burden burden of of my my secret.' secret.' she she sunk sunk down down gently gently at at the the doctor's doctor's feet, feet, though though he he did did his his utmost utmost to to prevent prevent her; her; and and said, said, looking looking up, up, tearfully, tearfully, into into his his face: face: 'do 'do not not speak speak to to me me yet! yet! let let me me say say a a little little more! more! right right or or wrong, wrong, if if this this were were to to be be done done again, again, i i think think i i should should do do just just the the same. same. you never never can can know know what what it it was was to to be be devoted devoted to to you, with with those those old old associations; associations; to to find find that that anyone anyone could could be be so so hard hard as as to to suppose suppose that that the the truth truth of of my my heart heart was was bartered bartered away, away, and and to to be be surrounded surrounded by by appearances appearances confirming confirming that that belief. belief. i i was was very very young, young, and and had had no no adviser. adviser. between between mama mama and and me, me, in in all all relating relating to to you, there there was was a a wide wide division. division. if if i i shrunk shrunk into into myself, myself, hiding hiding the the disrespect disrespect i i had had undergone, undergone, it it was was because because i i honoured honoured you so so much, much, and and so so much much wished wished that that you should should honour honour me!' me!' 'annie, 'annie, my my pure pure heart!' heart!' said said the the doctor, doctor, 'my 'my dear dear girl!' girl!' 'a 'a little little more! more! a a very very few few words words more! more! i i used used to to think think there there were were so so many many whom whom you might might have have married, married, who who would would not not have have brought brought such such charge charge and and trouble trouble on on you, and and who who would would have have made made your your home home a a worthier worthier home. home. i i used used to to be be afraid afraid that that i i had had better better have have remained remained your your pupil, pupil, and and almost almost your your child. child. i i used used to to fear fear that that i i was was so so unsuited unsuited to to your your learning learning and and wisdom. wisdom. if if all all this this made made me me shrink shrink within within myself myself (as (as indeed indeed it it did), did), when when i i had had that that to to tell, tell, it it was was still still because because i i honoured honoured you so so much, much, and and hoped hoped that that you might might one one day day honour honour me.' me.' 'that 'that day day has has shone shone this this long long time, time, annie,' annie,' said said the the doctor, doctor, and and can can have have but but one one long long night, night, my my dear.' dear.' 'another 'another word! word! i i afterwards afterwards meant meant -- -- steadfastly steadfastly meant, meant, and and purposed purposed to to myself myself -- -- to to bear bear the the whole whole weight weight of of knowing knowing the the unworthiness unworthiness of of one one to to whom whom you had had been been so so good. good. and and now now a a last last word, word, dearest dearest and and best best of of friends! friends! the the cause cause of of the the late late change change in in you, which which i i have have seen seen with with so so much much pain pain and and sorrow, sorrow, and and have have sometimes sometimes referred referred to to my my old old apprehension apprehension -- -- at at other other times times to to lingering lingering suppositions suppositions nearer nearer to to the the truth truth -- -- has has been been made made clear clear tonight; tonight; and and by by an an accident accident i i have have also also come come to to know, know, tonight, tonight, the the full full measure measure of of your your noble noble trust trust in in me, me, even even under under that that mistake. mistake. i i do do not not hope hope that that any any love love and and duty duty i i may may render render in in return, return, will will ever ever make make me me worthy worthy of of your your priceless priceless confidence; confidence; but but with with all all this this knowledge knowledge fresh fresh upon upon me, me, i i can can lift lift my my eyes eyes to to this this dear dear face, face, revered revered as as a a father's, father's, loved loved as as a a husband's, husband's, sacred sacred to to me me in in my my childhood childhood as as a a friend's, friend's, and and solemnly solemnly declare declare that that in in my my lightest lightest thought thought i i have have never never wronged wronged you; never never wavered wavered in in the the love love and and the the fidelity fidelity i i owe owe you!' she she had had her her arms arms around around the the doctor's doctor's neck, neck, and and he he leant leant his his head head down down over over her, her, mingling mingling his his grey grey hair hair with with her her dark dark brown brown tresses. tresses. 'oh, 'oh, hold hold me me to to your your heart, heart, my my husband! husband! never never cast cast me me out! out! do do not not think think or or speak speak of of disparity disparity between between us, us, for for there there is is none, none, except except in in all all my my many many imperfections. imperfections. every every succeeding succeeding year year i i have have known known this this better, better, as as i i have have esteemed esteemed you more more and and more. more. oh, oh, take take me me to to your your heart, heart, my my husband, husband, for for my my love love was was founded founded on on a a rock, rock, and and it it endures!' endures!' in in the the silence silence that that ensued, ensued, my my aunt aunt walked walked gravely gravely up up to to mr. mr. dick, dick, without without at at all all hurrying hurrying herself, herself, and and gave gave him him a a hug hug and and a a sounding sounding kiss. kiss. and and it it was was very very fortunate, fortunate, with with a a view view to to his his credit, credit, that that she she did did so; so; for for i i am am confident confident that that i i detected detected him him at at that that moment moment in in the the act act of of making making preparations preparations to to stand stand on on one one leg, leg, as as an an appropriate appropriate expression expression of of delight. delight. 'you are are a a very very remarkable remarkable man, man, dick!' dick!' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with an an air air of of unqualified unqualified approbation; approbation; 'and 'and never never pretend pretend to to be be anything anything else, else, for for i i know know better!' better!' with with that, that, my my aunt aunt pulled pulled him him by by the the sleeve, sleeve, and and nodded nodded to to me; me; and and we we three three stole stole quietly quietly out out of of the the room, room, and and came came away. away. 'that's 'that's a a settler settler for for our our military military friend, friend, at at any any rate,' rate,' said said my my aunt, aunt, on on the the way way home. home. 'i 'i should should sleep sleep the the better better for for that, that, if if there there was was nothing nothing else else to to be be glad glad of!' of!' 'she 'she was was quite quite overcome, overcome, i i am am afraid,' afraid,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with great great commiseration. commiseration. 'what! 'what! did did you ever ever see see a a crocodile crocodile overcome?' overcome?' inquired inquired my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i don't don't think think i i ever ever saw saw a a crocodile,' crocodile,' returned returned mr. mr. dick, dick, mildly. mildly. 'there 'there never never would would have have been been anything anything the the matter, matter, if if it it hadn't hadn't been been for for that that old old animal,' animal,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with strong strong emphasis. emphasis. 'it's 'it's very very much much to to be be wished wished that that some some mothers mothers would would leave leave their their daughters daughters alone alone after after marriage, marriage, and and not not be be so so violently violently affectionate. affectionate. they they seem seem to to think think the the only only return return that that can can be be made made them them for for bringing bringing an an unfortunate unfortunate young young woman woman into into the the world world -- -- god god bless bless my my soul, soul, as as if if she she asked asked to to be be brought, brought, or or wanted wanted to to come! come! -- -- is is full full liberty liberty to to worry worry her her out out of of it it again. again. what what are are you thinking thinking of, of, trot?' trot?' i i was was thinking thinking of of all all that that had had been been said. said. my my mind mind was was still still running running on on some some of of the the expressions expressions used. used. 'there 'there can can be be no no disparity disparity in in marriage marriage like like unsuitability unsuitability of of mind mind and and purpose.' purpose.' 'the 'the first first mistaken mistaken impulse impulse of of an an undisciplined undisciplined heart.' heart.' 'my 'my love love was was founded founded on on a a rock.' rock.' but but we we were were at at home; home; and and the the trodden trodden leaves leaves were were lying lying under-foot, under-foot, and and the the autumn autumn wind wind was was blowing. blowing. chapter chapter 46. 46. intelligence intelligence i i must must have have been been married, married, if if i i may may trust trust to to my my imperfect imperfect memory memory for for dates, dates, about about a a year year or or so, so, when when one one evening, evening, as as i i was was returning returning from from a a solitary solitary walk, walk, thinking thinking of of the the book book i i was was then then writing writing -- -- for for my my success success had had steadily steadily increased increased with with my my steady steady application, application, and and i i was was engaged engaged at at that that time time upon upon my my first first work work of of fiction fiction -- -- i i came came past past mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's house. house. i i had had often often passed passed it it before, before, during during my my residence residence in in that that neighbourhood, neighbourhood, though though never never when when i i could could choose choose another another road. road. howbeit, howbeit, it it did did sometimes sometimes happen happen that that it it was was not not easy easy to to find find another, another, without without making making a a long long circuit; circuit; and and so so i i had had passed passed that that way, way, upon upon the the whole, whole, pretty pretty often. often. i i had had never never done done more more than than glance glance at at the the house, house, as as i i went went by by with with a a quickened quickened step. step. it it had had been been uniformly uniformly gloomy gloomy and and dull. dull. none none of of the the best best rooms rooms abutted abutted on on the the road; road; and and the the narrow, narrow, heavily-framed heavily-framed old-fashioned old-fashioned windows, windows, never never cheerful cheerful under under any any circumstances, circumstances, looked looked very very dismal, dismal, close close shut, shut, and and with with their their blinds blinds always always drawn drawn down. down. there there was was a a covered covered way way across across a a little little paved paved court, court, to to an an entrance entrance that that was was never never used; used; and and there there was was one one round round staircase staircase window, window, at at odds odds with with all all the the rest, rest, and and the the only only one one unshaded unshaded by by a a blind, blind, which which had had the the same same unoccupied unoccupied blank blank look. look. i i do do not not remember remember that that i i ever ever saw saw a a light light in in all all the the house. house. if if i i had had been been a a casual casual passer-by, passer-by, i i should should have have probably probably supposed supposed that that some some childless childless person person lay lay dead dead in in it. it. if if i i had had happily happily possessed possessed no no knowledge knowledge of of the the place, place, and and had had seen seen it it often often in in that that changeless changeless state, state, i i should should have have pleased pleased my my fancy fancy with with many many ingenious ingenious speculations, speculations, i i dare dare say. say. as as it it was, was, i i thought thought as as little little of of it it as as i i might. might. but but my my mind mind could could not not go go by by it it and and leave leave it, it, as as my my body body did; did; and and it it usually usually awakened awakened a a long long train train of of meditations. meditations. coming coming before before me, me, on on this this particular particular evening evening that that i i mention, mention, mingled mingled with with the the childish childish recollections recollections and and later later fancies, fancies, the the ghosts ghosts of of half-formed half-formed hopes, hopes, the the broken broken shadows shadows of of disappointments disappointments dimly dimly seen seen and and understood, understood, the the blending blending of of experience experience and and imagination, imagination, incidental incidental to to the the occupation occupation with with which which my my thoughts thoughts had had been been busy, busy, it it was was more more than than commonly commonly suggestive. suggestive. i i fell fell into into a a brown brown study study as as i i walked walked on, on, and and a a voice voice at at my my side side made made me me start. start. it it was was a a woman's woman's voice, voice, too. too. i i was was not not long long in in recollecting recollecting mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's little little parlour-maid, parlour-maid, who who had had formerly formerly worn worn blue blue ribbons ribbons in in her her cap. cap. she she had had taken taken them them out out now, now, to to adapt adapt herself, herself, i i suppose, suppose, to to the the altered altered character character of of the the house; house; and and wore wore but but one one or or two two disconsolate disconsolate bows bows of of sober sober brown. brown. 'if 'if you please, please, sir, sir, would would you have have the the goodness goodness to to walk walk in, in, and and speak speak to to miss miss dartle?' dartle?' 'has 'has miss miss dartle dartle sent sent you for for me?' me?' i i inquired. inquired. 'not 'not tonight, tonight, sir, sir, but but it's it's just just the the same. same. miss miss dartle dartle saw saw you pass pass a a night night or or two two ago; ago; and and i i was was to to sit sit at at work work on on the the staircase, staircase, and and when when i i saw saw you pass pass again, again, to to ask ask you to to step step in in and and speak speak to to her.' her.' i i turned turned back, back, and and inquired inquired of of my my conductor, conductor, as as we we went went along, along, how how mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was. was. she she said said her her lady lady was was but but poorly, poorly, and and kept kept her her own own room room a a good good deal. deal. when when we we arrived arrived at at the the house, house, i i was was directed directed to to miss miss dartle dartle in in the the garden, garden, and and left left to to make make my my presence presence known known to to her her myself. myself. she she was was sitting sitting on on a a seat seat at at one one end end of of a a kind kind of of terrace, terrace, overlooking overlooking the the great great city. city. it it was was a a sombre sombre evening, evening, with with a a lurid lurid light light in in the the sky; sky; and and as as i i saw saw the the prospect prospect scowling scowling in in the the distance, distance, with with here here and and there there some some larger larger object object starting starting up up into into the the sullen sullen glare, glare, i i fancied fancied it it was was no no inapt inapt companion companion to to the the memory memory of of this this fierce fierce woman. woman. she she saw saw me me as as i i advanced, advanced, and and rose rose for for a a moment moment to to receive receive me. me. i i thought thought her, her, then, then, still still more more colourless colourless and and thin thin than than when when i i had had seen seen her her last; last; the the flashing flashing eyes eyes still still brighter, brighter, and and the the scar scar still still plainer. plainer. our our meeting meeting was was not not cordial. cordial. we we had had parted parted angrily angrily on on the the last last occasion; occasion; and and there there was was an an air air of of disdain disdain about about her, her, which which she she took took no no pains pains to to conceal. conceal. 'i 'i am am told told you wish wish to to speak speak to to me, me, miss miss dartle,' dartle,' said said i, i, standing standing near near her, her, with with my my hand hand upon upon the the back back of of the the seat, seat, and and declining declining her her gesture gesture of of invitation invitation to to sit sit down. down. 'if 'if you please,' please,' said said she. she. 'pray 'pray has has this this girl girl been been found?' found?' 'no.' 'no.' 'and 'and yet yet she she has has run run away!' away!' i i saw saw her her thin thin lips lips working working while while she she looked looked at at me, me, as as if if they they were were eager eager to to load load her her with with reproaches. reproaches. 'run 'run away?' away?' i i repeated. repeated. 'yes! 'yes! from from him,' him,' she she said, said, with with a a laugh. laugh. 'if 'if she she is is not not found, found, perhaps perhaps she she never never will will be be found. found. she she may may be be dead!' dead!' the the vaunting vaunting cruelty cruelty with with which which she she met met my my glance, glance, i i never never saw saw expressed expressed in in any any other other face face that that ever ever i i have have seen. seen. 'to 'to wish wish her her dead,' dead,' said said i, i, 'may 'may be be the the kindest kindest wish wish that that one one of of her her own own sex sex could could bestow bestow upon upon her. her. i i am am glad glad that that time time has has softened softened you so so much, much, miss miss dartle.' dartle.' she she condescended condescended to to make make no no reply, reply, but, but, turning turning on on me me with with another another scornful scornful laugh, laugh, said: said: 'the 'the friends friends of of this this excellent excellent and and much-injured much-injured young young lady lady are are friends friends of of yours. yours. you are are their their champion, champion, and and assert assert their their rights. rights. do do you wish wish to to know know what what is is known known of of her?' her?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i. i. she she rose rose with with an an ill-favoured ill-favoured smile, smile, and and taking taking a a few few steps steps towards towards a a wall wall of of holly holly that that was was near near at at hand, hand, dividing dividing the the lawn lawn from from a a kitchen-garden, kitchen-garden, said, said, in in a a louder louder voice, voice, 'come 'come here!' here!' -- -- as as if if she she were were calling calling to to some some unclean unclean beast. beast. 'you will will restrain restrain any any demonstrative demonstrative championship championship or or vengeance vengeance in in this this place, place, of of course, course, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' said said she, she, looking looking over over her her shoulder shoulder at at me me with with the the same same expression. expression. i i inclined inclined my my head, head, without without knowing knowing what what she she meant; meant; and and she she said, said, 'come 'come here!' here!' again; again; and and returned, returned, followed followed by by the the respectable respectable mr. mr. littimer, littimer, who, who, with with undiminished undiminished respectability, respectability, made made me me a a bow, bow, and and took took up up his his position position behind behind her. her. the the air air of of wicked wicked grace: grace: of of triumph, triumph, in in which, which, strange strange to to say, say, there there was was yet yet something something feminine feminine and and alluring: alluring: with with which which she she reclined reclined upon upon the the seat seat between between us, us, and and looked looked at at me, me, was was worthy worthy of of a a cruel cruel princess princess in in a a legend. legend. 'now,' 'now,' said said she, she, imperiously, imperiously, without without glancing glancing at at him, him, and and touching touching the the old old wound wound as as it it throbbed: throbbed: perhaps, perhaps, in in this this instance, instance, with with pleasure pleasure rather rather than than pain. pain. 'tell 'tell mr. mr. copperfield copperfield about about the the flight.' flight.' 'mr. 'mr. james james and and myself, myself, ma'am ma'am -- -- ' ' 'don't 'don't address address yourself yourself to to me!' me!' she she interrupted interrupted with with a a frown. frown. 'mr. 'mr. james james and and myself, myself, sir sir -- -- ' ' 'nor 'nor to to me, me, if if you please,' please,' said said i. i. mr. mr. littimer, littimer, without without being being at at all all discomposed, discomposed, signified signified by by a a slight slight obeisance, obeisance, that that anything anything that that was was most most agreeable agreeable to to us us was was most most agreeable agreeable to to him; him; and and began began again. again. 'mr. 'mr. james james and and myself myself have have been been abroad abroad with with the the young young woman, woman, ever ever since since she she left left yarmouth yarmouth under under mr. mr. james's james's protection. protection. we we have have been been in in a a variety variety of of places, places, and and seen seen a a deal deal of of foreign foreign country. country. we we have have been been in in france, france, switzerland, switzerland, italy, italy, in in fact, fact, almost almost all all parts.' parts.' he he looked looked at at the the back back of of the the seat, seat, as as if if he he were were addressing addressing himself himself to to that; that; and and softly softly played played upon upon it it with with his his hands, hands, as as if if he he were were striking striking chords chords upon upon a a dumb dumb piano. piano. 'mr. 'mr. james james took took quite quite uncommonly uncommonly to to the the young young woman; woman; and and was was more more settled, settled, for for a a length length of of time, time, than than i i have have known known him him to to be be since since i i have have been been in in his his service. service. the the young young woman woman was was very very improvable, improvable, and and spoke spoke the the languages; languages; and and wouldn't wouldn't have have been been known known for for the the same same country-person. country-person. i i noticed noticed that that she she was was much much admired admired wherever wherever we we went.' went.' miss miss dartle dartle put put her her hand hand upon upon her her side. side. i i saw saw him him steal steal a a glance glance at at her, her, and and slightly slightly smile smile to to himself. himself. 'very 'very much much admired, admired, indeed, indeed, the the young young woman woman was. was. what what with with her her dress; dress; what what with with the the air air and and sun; sun; what what with with being being made made so so much much of; of; what what with with this, this, that, that, and and the the other; other; her her merits merits really really attracted attracted general general notice.' notice.' he he made made a a short short pause. pause. her her eyes eyes wandered wandered restlessly restlessly over over the the distant distant prospect, prospect, and and she she bit bit her her nether nether lip lip to to stop stop that that busy busy mouth. mouth. taking taking his his hands hands from from the the seat, seat, and and placing placing one one of of them them within within the the other, other, as as he he settled settled himself himself on on one one leg, leg, mr. mr. littimer littimer proceeded, proceeded, with with his his eyes eyes cast cast down, down, and and his his respectable respectable head head a a little little advanced, advanced, and and a a little little on on one one side: side: 'the 'the young young woman woman went went on on in in this this manner manner for for some some time, time, being being occasionally occasionally low low in in her her spirits, spirits, until until i i think think she she began began to to weary weary mr. mr. james james by by giving giving way way to to her her low low spirits spirits and and tempers tempers of of that that kind; kind; and and things things were were not not so so comfortable. comfortable. mr. mr. james james he he began began to to be be restless restless again. again. the the more more restless restless he he got, got, the the worse worse she she got; got; and and i i must must say, say, for for myself, myself, that that i i had had a a very very difficult difficult time time of of it it indeed indeed between between the the two. two. still still matters matters were were patched patched up up here, here, and and made made good good there, there, over over and and over over again; again; and and altogether altogether lasted, lasted, i i am am sure, sure, for for a a longer longer time time than than anybody anybody could could have have expected.' expected.' recalling recalling her her eyes eyes from from the the distance, distance, she she looked looked at at me me again again now, now, with with her her former former air. air. mr. mr. littimer, littimer, clearing clearing his his throat throat behind behind his his hand hand with with a a respectable respectable short short cough, cough, changed changed legs, legs, and and went went on: on: 'at 'at last, last, when when there there had had been, been, upon upon the the whole, whole, a a good good many many words words and and reproaches, reproaches, mr. mr. james james he he set set off off one one morning, morning, from from the the neighbourhood neighbourhood of of naples, naples, where where we we had had a a villa villa (the (the young young woman woman being being very very partial partial to to the the sea), sea), and, and, under under pretence pretence of of coming coming back back in in a a day day or or so, so, left left it it in in charge charge with with me me to to break break it it out, out, that, that, for for the the general general happiness happiness of of all all concerned, concerned, he he was' was' -- -- here here an an interruption interruption of of the the short short cough cough -- -- 'gone. 'gone. but but mr. mr. james, james, i i must must say, say, certainly certainly did did behave behave extremely extremely honourable; honourable; for for he he proposed proposed that that the the young young woman woman should should marry marry a a very very respectable respectable person, person, who who was was fully fully prepared prepared to to overlook overlook the the past, past, and and who who was, was, at at least, least, as as good good as as anybody anybody the the young young woman woman could could have have aspired aspired to to in in a a regular regular way: way: her her connexions connexions being being very very common.' common.' he he changed changed legs legs again, again, and and wetted wetted his his lips. lips. i i was was convinced convinced that that the the scoundrel scoundrel spoke spoke of of himself, himself, and and i i saw saw my my conviction conviction reflected reflected in in miss miss dartle's dartle's face. face. 'this 'this i i also also had had it it in in charge charge to to communicate. communicate. i i was was willing willing to to do do anything anything to to relieve relieve mr. mr. james james from from his his difficulty, difficulty, and and to to restore restore harmony harmony between between himself himself and and an an affectionate affectionate parent, parent, who who has has undergone undergone so so much much on on his his account. account. therefore therefore i i undertook undertook the the commission. commission. the the young young woman's woman's violence violence when when she she came came to, to, after after i i broke broke the the fact fact of of his his departure, departure, was was beyond beyond all all expectations. expectations. she she was was quite quite mad, mad, and and had had to to be be held held by by force; force; or, or, if if she she couldn't couldn't have have got got to to a a knife, knife, or or got got to to the the sea, sea, she'd she'd have have beaten beaten her her head head against against the the marble marble floor.' floor.' miss miss dartle, dartle, leaning leaning back back upon upon the the seat, seat, with with a a light light of of exultation exultation in in her her face, face, seemed seemed almost almost to to caress caress the the sounds sounds this this fellow fellow had had uttered. uttered. 'but 'but when when i i came came to to the the second second part part of of what what had had been been entrusted entrusted to to me,' me,' said said mr. mr. littimer, littimer, rubbing rubbing his his hands hands uneasily, uneasily, 'which 'which anybody anybody might might have have supposed supposed would would have have been, been, at at all all events, events, appreciated appreciated as as a a kind kind intention, intention, then then the the young young woman woman came came out out in in her her true true colours. colours. a a more more outrageous outrageous person person i i never never did did see. see. her her conduct conduct was was surprisingly surprisingly bad. bad. she she had had no no more more gratitude, gratitude, no no more more feeling, feeling, no no more more patience, patience, no no more more reason reason in in her, her, than than a a stock stock or or a a stone. stone. if if i i hadn't hadn't been been upon upon my my guard, guard, i i am am convinced convinced she she would would have have had had my my blood.' blood.' 'i 'i think think the the better better of of her her for for it,' it,' said said i, i, indignantly. indignantly. mr. mr. littimer littimer bent bent his his head, head, as as much much as as to to say, say, 'indeed, 'indeed, sir? sir? but but you're you're young!' young!' and and resumed resumed his his narrative. narrative. 'it 'it was was necessary, necessary, in in short, short, for for a a time, time, to to take take away away everything everything nigh nigh her, her, that that she she could could do do herself, herself, or or anybody anybody else, else, an an injury injury with, with, and and to to shut shut her her up up close. close. notwithstanding notwithstanding which, which, she she got got out out in in the the night; night; forced forced the the lattice lattice of of a a window, window, that that i i had had nailed nailed up up myself; myself; dropped dropped on on a a vine vine that that was was trailed trailed below; below; and and never never has has been been seen seen or or heard heard of, of, to to my my knowledge, knowledge, since.' since.' 'she 'she is is dead, dead, perhaps,' perhaps,' said said miss miss dartle, dartle, with with a a smile, smile, as as if if she she could could have have spurned spurned the the body body of of the the ruined ruined girl. girl. 'she 'she may may have have drowned drowned herself, herself, miss,' miss,' returned returned mr. mr. littimer, littimer, catching catching at at an an excuse excuse for for addressing addressing himself himself to to somebody. somebody. 'it's 'it's very very possible. possible. or, or, she she may may have have had had assistance assistance from from the the boatmen, boatmen, and and the the boatmen's boatmen's wives wives and and children. children. being being given given to to low low company, company, she she was was very very much much in in the the habit habit of of talking talking to to them them on on the the beach, beach, miss miss dartle, dartle, and and sitting sitting by by their their boats. boats. i i have have known known her her do do it, it, when when mr. mr. james james has has been been away, away, whole whole days. days. mr. mr. james james was was far far from from pleased pleased to to find find out, out, once, once, that that she she had had told told the the children children she she was was a a boatman's boatman's daughter, daughter, and and that that in in her her own own country, country, long long ago, ago, she she had had roamed roamed about about the the beach, beach, like like them.' them.' oh, oh, emily! emily! unhappy unhappy beauty! beauty! what what a a picture picture rose rose before before me me of of her her sitting sitting on on the the far-off far-off shore, shore, among among the the children children like like herself herself when when she she was was innocent, innocent, listening listening to to little little voices voices such such as as might might have have called called her her mother mother had had she she been been a a poor poor man's man's wife; wife; and and to to the the great great voice voice of of the the sea, sea, with with its its eternal eternal 'never 'never more!' more!' 'when 'when it it was was clear clear that that nothing nothing could could be be done, done, miss miss dartle dartle -- -- ' ' 'did 'did i i tell tell you not not to to speak speak to to me?' me?' she she said, said, with with stern stern contempt. contempt. 'you spoke spoke to to me, me, miss,' miss,' he he replied. replied. 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon. pardon. but but it it is is my my service service to to obey.' obey.' 'do 'do your your service,' service,' she she returned. returned. 'finish 'finish your your story, story, and and go!' go!' 'when 'when it it was was clear,' clear,' he he said, said, with with infinite infinite respectability respectability and and an an obedient obedient bow, bow, 'that 'that she she was was not not to to be be found, found, i i went went to to mr. mr. james, james, at at the the place place where where it it had had been been agreed agreed that that i i should should write write to to him, him, and and informed informed him him of of what what had had occurred. occurred. words words passed passed between between us us in in consequence, consequence, and and i i felt felt it it due due to to my my character character to to leave leave him. him. i i could could bear, bear, and and i i have have borne, borne, a a great great deal deal from from mr. mr. james; james; but but he he insulted insulted me me too too far. far. he he hurt hurt me. me. knowing knowing the the unfortunate unfortunate difference difference between between himself himself and and his his mother, mother, and and what what her her anxiety anxiety of of mind mind was was likely likely to to be, be, i i took took the the liberty liberty of of coming coming home home to to england, england, and and relating relating -- -- ' ' 'for 'for money money which which i i paid paid him,' him,' said said miss miss dartle dartle to to me. me. 'just 'just so, so, ma'am ma'am -- -- and and relating relating what what i i knew. knew. i i am am not not aware,' aware,' said said mr. mr. littimer, littimer, after after a a moment's moment's reflection, reflection, 'that 'that there there is is anything anything else. else. i i am am at at present present out out of of employment, employment, and and should should be be happy happy to to meet meet with with a a respectable respectable situation.' situation.' miss miss dartle dartle glanced glanced at at me, me, as as though though she she would would inquire inquire if if there there were were anything anything that that i i desired desired to to ask. ask. as as there there was was something something which which had had occurred occurred to to my my mind, mind, i i said said in in reply: reply: 'i 'i could could wish wish to to know know from from this this -- -- creature,' creature,' i i could could not not bring bring myself myself to to utter utter any any more more conciliatory conciliatory word, word, 'whether 'whether they they intercepted intercepted a a letter letter that that was was written written to to her her from from home, home, or or whether whether he he supposes supposes that that she she received received it.' it.' he he remained remained calm calm and and silent, silent, with with his his eyes eyes fixed fixed on on the the ground, ground, and and the the tip tip of of every every finger finger of of his his right right hand hand delicately delicately poised poised against against the the tip tip of of every every finger finger of of his his left. left. miss miss dartle dartle turned turned her her head head disdainfully disdainfully towards towards him. him. 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, miss,' miss,' he he said, said, awakening awakening from from his his abstraction, abstraction, 'but, 'but, however however submissive submissive to to you, i i have have my my position, position, though though a a servant. servant. mr. mr. copperfield copperfield and and you, miss, miss, are are different different people. people. if if mr. mr. copperfield copperfield wishes wishes to to know know anything anything from from me, me, i i take take the the liberty liberty of of reminding reminding mr. mr. copperfield copperfield that that he he can can put put a a question question to to me. me. i i have have a a character character to to maintain.' maintain.' after after a a momentary momentary struggle struggle with with myself, myself, i i turned turned my my eyes eyes upon upon him, him, and and said, said, 'you have have heard heard my my question. question. consider consider it it addressed addressed to to yourself, yourself, if if you choose. choose. what what answer answer do do you make?' make?' 'sir,' 'sir,' he he rejoined, rejoined, with with an an occasional occasional separation separation and and reunion reunion of of those those delicate delicate tips, tips, 'my 'my answer answer must must be be qualified; qualified; because, because, to to betray betray mr. mr. james's james's confidence confidence to to his his mother, mother, and and to to betray betray it it to to you, are are two two different different actions. actions. it it is is not not probable, probable, i i consider, consider, that that mr. mr. james james would would encourage encourage the the receipt receipt of of letters letters likely likely to to increase increase low low spirits spirits and and unpleasantness; unpleasantness; but but further further than than that, that, sir, sir, i i should should wish wish to to avoid avoid going.' going.' 'is 'is that that all?' all?' inquired inquired miss miss dartle dartle of of me. me. i i indicated indicated that that i i had had nothing nothing more more to to say. say. 'except,' 'except,' i i added, added, as as i i saw saw him him moving moving off, off, 'that 'that i i understand understand this this fellow's fellow's part part in in the the wicked wicked story, story, and and that, that, as as i i shall shall make make it it known known to to the the honest honest man man who who has has been been her her father father from from her her childhood, childhood, i i would would recommend recommend him him to to avoid avoid going going too too much much into into public.' public.' he he had had stopped stopped the the moment moment i i began, began, and and had had listened listened with with his his usual usual repose repose of of manner. manner. 'thank 'thank you, sir. sir. but but you'll you'll excuse excuse me me if if i i say, say, sir, sir, that that there there are are neither neither slaves slaves nor nor slave-drivers slave-drivers in in this this country, country, and and that that people people are are not not allowed allowed to to take take the the law law into into their their own own hands. hands. if if they they do, do, it it is is more more to to their their own own peril, peril, i i believe, believe, than than to to other other people's. people's. consequently consequently speaking, speaking, i i am am not not at at all all afraid afraid of of going going wherever wherever i i may may wish, wish, sir.' sir.' with with that, that, he he made made a a polite polite bow; bow; and, and, with with another another to to miss miss dartle, dartle, went went away away through through the the arch arch in in the the wall wall of of holly holly by by which which he he had had come. come. miss miss dartle dartle and and i i regarded regarded each each other other for for a a little little while while in in silence; silence; her her manner manner being being exactly exactly what what it it was, was, when when she she had had produced produced the the man. man. 'he 'he says says besides,' besides,' she she observed, observed, with with a a slow slow curling curling of of her her lip, lip, 'that 'that his his master, master, as as he he hears, hears, is is coasting coasting spain; spain; and and this this done, done, is is away away to to gratify gratify his his seafaring seafaring tastes tastes till till he he is is weary. weary. but but this this is is of of no no interest interest to to you. between between these these two two proud proud persons, persons, mother mother and and son, son, there there is is a a wider wider breach breach than than before, before, and and little little hope hope of of its its healing, healing, for for they they are are one one at at heart, heart, and and time time makes makes each each more more obstinate obstinate and and imperious. imperious. neither neither is is this this of of any any interest interest to to you; but but it it introduces introduces what what i i wish wish to to say. say. this this devil devil whom whom you make make an an angel angel of. of. i i mean mean this this low low girl girl whom whom he he picked picked out out of of the the tide-mud,' tide-mud,' with with her her black black eyes eyes full full upon upon me, me, and and her her passionate passionate finger finger up, up, 'may 'may be be alive, alive, -- -- for for i i believe believe some some common common things things are are hard hard to to die. die. if if she she is, is, you will will desire desire to to have have a a pearl pearl of of such such price price found found and and taken taken care care of. of. we we desire desire that, that, too; too; that that he he may may not not by by any any chance chance be be made made her her prey prey again. again. so so far, far, we we are are united united in in one one interest; interest; and and that that is is why why i, i, who who would would do do her her any any mischief mischief that that so so coarse coarse a a wretch wretch is is capable capable of of feeling, feeling, have have sent sent for for you to to hear hear what what you have have heard.' heard.' i i saw, saw, by by the the change change in in her her face, face, that that someone someone was was advancing advancing behind behind me. me. it it was was mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, who who gave gave me me her her hand hand more more coldly coldly than than of of yore, yore, and and with with an an augmentation augmentation of of her her former former stateliness stateliness of of manner, manner, but but still, still, i i perceived perceived -- -- and and i i was was touched touched by by it it -- -- with with an an ineffaceable ineffaceable remembrance remembrance of of my my old old love love for for her her son. son. she she was was greatly greatly altered. altered. her her fine fine figure figure was was far far less less upright, upright, her her handsome handsome face face was was deeply deeply marked, marked, and and her her hair hair was was almost almost white. white. but but when when she she sat sat down down on on the the seat, seat, she she was was a a handsome handsome lady lady still; still; and and well well i i knew knew the the bright bright eye eye with with its its lofty lofty look, look, that that had had been been a a light light in in my my very very dreams dreams at at school. school. 'is 'is mr. mr. copperfield copperfield informed informed of of everything, everything, rosa?' rosa?' 'yes.' 'yes.' 'and 'and has has he he heard heard littimer littimer himself?' himself?' 'yes; 'yes; i i have have told told him him why why you wished wished it.' it.' 'you are are a a good good girl. girl. i i have have had had some some slight slight correspondence correspondence with with your your former former friend, friend, sir,' sir,' addressing addressing me, me, 'but 'but it it has has not not restored restored his his sense sense of of duty duty or or natural natural obligation. obligation. therefore therefore i i have have no no other other object object in in this, this, than than what what rosa rosa has has mentioned. mentioned. if, if, by by the the course course which which may may relieve relieve the the mind mind of of the the decent decent man man you brought brought here here (for (for whom whom i i am am sorry sorry -- -- i i can can say say no no more), more), my my son son may may be be saved saved from from again again falling falling into into the the snares snares of of a a designing designing enemy, enemy, well!' well!' she she drew drew herself herself up, up, and and sat sat looking looking straight straight before before her, her, far far away. away. 'madam,' 'madam,' i i said said respectfully, respectfully, 'i 'i understand. understand. i i assure assure you i i am am in in no no danger danger of of putting putting any any strained strained construction construction on on your your motives. motives. but but i i must must say, say, even even to to you, having having known known this this injured injured family family from from childhood, childhood, that that if if you suppose suppose the the girl, girl, so so deeply deeply wronged, wronged, has has not not been been cruelly cruelly deluded, deluded, and and would would not not rather rather die die a a hundred hundred deaths deaths than than take take a a cup cup of of water water from from your your son's son's hand hand now, now, you cherish cherish a a terrible terrible mistake.' mistake.' 'well, 'well, rosa, rosa, well!' well!' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, as as the the other other was was about about to to interpose, interpose, 'it 'it is is no no matter. matter. let let it it be. be. you are are married, married, sir, sir, i i am am told?' told?' i i answered answered that that i i had had been been some some time time married. married. 'and 'and are are doing doing well? well? i i hear hear little little in in the the quiet quiet life life i i lead, lead, but but i i understand understand you are are beginning beginning to to be be famous.' famous.' 'i 'i have have been been very very fortunate,' fortunate,' i i said, said, 'and 'and find find my my name name connected connected with with some some praise.' praise.' 'you have have no no mother?' mother?' -- -- in in a a softened softened voice. voice. 'no.' 'no.' 'it 'it is is a a pity,' pity,' she she returned. returned. 'she 'she would would have have been been proud proud of of you. good good night!' night!' i i took took the the hand hand she she held held out out with with a a dignified, dignified, unbending unbending air, air, and and it it was was as as calm calm in in mine mine as as if if her her breast breast had had been been at at peace. peace. her her pride pride could could still still its its very very pulses, pulses, it it appeared, appeared, and and draw draw the the placid placid veil veil before before her her face, face, through through which which she she sat sat looking looking straight straight before before her her on on the the far far distance. distance. as as i i moved moved away away from from them them along along the the terrace, terrace, i i could could not not help help observing observing how how steadily steadily they they both both sat sat gazing gazing on on the the prospect, prospect, and and how how it it thickened thickened and and closed closed around around them. them. here here and and there, there, some some early early lamps lamps were were seen seen to to twinkle twinkle in in the the distant distant city; city; and and in in the the eastern eastern quarter quarter of of the the sky sky the the lurid lurid light light still still hovered. hovered. but, but, from from the the greater greater part part of of the the broad broad valley valley interposed, interposed, a a mist mist was was rising rising like like a a sea, sea, which, which, mingling mingling with with the the darkness, darkness, made made it it seem seem as as if if the the gathering gathering waters waters would would encompass encompass them. them. i i have have reason reason to to remember remember this, this, and and think think of of it it with with awe; awe; for for before before i i looked looked upon upon those those two two again, again, a a stormy stormy sea sea had had risen risen to to their their feet. feet. reflecting reflecting on on what what had had been been thus thus told told me, me, i i felt felt it it right right that that it it should should be be communicated communicated to to mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. on on the the following following evening evening i i went went into into london london in in quest quest of of him. him. he he was was always always wandering wandering about about from from place place to to place, place, with with his his one one object object of of recovering recovering his his niece niece before before him; him; but but was was more more in in london london than than elsewhere. elsewhere. often often and and often, often, now, now, had had i i seen seen him him in in the the dead dead of of night night passing passing along along the the streets, streets, searching, searching, among among the the few few who who loitered loitered out out of of doors doors at at those those untimely untimely hours, hours, for for what what he he dreaded dreaded to to find. find. he he kept kept a a lodging lodging over over the the little little chandler's chandler's shop shop in in hungerford hungerford market, market, which which i i have have had had occasion occasion to to mention mention more more than than once, once, and and from from which which he he first first went went forth forth upon upon his his errand errand of of mercy. mercy. hither hither i i directed directed my my walk. walk. on on making making inquiry inquiry for for him, him, i i learned learned from from the the people people of of the the house house that that he he had had not not gone gone out out yet, yet, and and i i should should find find him him in in his his room room upstairs. upstairs. he he was was sitting sitting reading reading by by a a window window in in which which he he kept kept a a few few plants. plants. the the room room was was very very neat neat and and orderly. orderly. i i saw saw in in a a moment moment that that it it was was always always kept kept prepared prepared for for her her reception, reception, and and that that he he never never went went out out but but he he thought thought it it possible possible he he might might bring bring her her home. home. he he had had not not heard heard my my tap tap at at the the door, door, and and only only raised raised his his eyes eyes when when i i laid laid my my hand hand upon upon his his shoulder. shoulder. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy! davy! thankee, thankee, sir! sir! thankee thankee hearty, hearty, for for this this visit! visit! sit sit ye ye down. down. you're you're kindly kindly welcome, welcome, sir!' sir!' 'mr. 'mr. peggotty,' peggotty,' said said i, i, taking taking the the chair chair he he handed handed me, me, 'don't 'don't expect expect much! much! i i have have heard heard some some news.' news.' 'of 'of em'ly!' em'ly!' he he put put his his hand, hand, in in a a nervous nervous manner, manner, on on his his mouth, mouth, and and turned turned pale, pale, as as he he fixed fixed his his eyes eyes on on mine. mine. 'it 'it gives gives no no clue clue to to where where she she is; is; but but she she is is not not with with him.' him.' he he sat sat down, down, looking looking intently intently at at me, me, and and listened listened in in profound profound silence silence to to all all i i had had to to tell. tell. i i well well remember remember the the sense sense of of dignity, dignity, beauty beauty even, even, with with which which the the patient patient gravity gravity of of his his face face impressed impressed me, me, when, when, having having gradually gradually removed removed his his eyes eyes from from mine, mine, he he sat sat looking looking downward, downward, leaning leaning his his forehead forehead on on his his hand. hand. he he offered offered no no interruption, interruption, but but remained remained throughout throughout perfectly perfectly still. still. he he seemed seemed to to pursue pursue her her figure figure through through the the narrative, narrative, and and to to let let every every other other shape shape go go by by him, him, as as if if it it were were nothing. nothing. when when i i had had done, done, he he shaded shaded his his face, face, and and continued continued silent. silent. i i looked looked out out of of the the window window for for a a little little while, while, and and occupied occupied myself myself with with the the plants. plants. 'how 'how do do you fare fare to to feel feel about about it, it, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' he he inquired inquired at at length. length. 'i 'i think think that that she she is is living,' living,' i i replied. replied. 'i 'i doen't doen't know. know. maybe maybe the the first first shock shock was was too too rough, rough, and and in in the the wildness wildness of of her her art art -- -- ! ! that that there there blue blue water water as as she she used used to to speak speak on. on. could could she she have have thowt thowt o' o' that that so so many many year, year, because because it it was was to to be be her her grave!' grave!' he he said said this, this, musing, musing, in in a a low, low, frightened frightened voice; voice; and and walked walked across across the the little little room. room. 'and 'and yet,' yet,' he he added, added, 'mas'r 'mas'r davy, davy, i i have have felt felt so so sure sure as as she she was was living living -- -- i i have have know'd, know'd, awake awake and and sleeping, sleeping, as as it it was was so so trew trew that that i i should should find find her her -- -- i i have have been been so so led led on on by by it, it, and and held held up up by by it it -- -- that that i i doen't doen't believe believe i i can can have have been been deceived. deceived. no! no! em'ly's em'ly's alive!' alive!' he he put put his his hand hand down down firmly firmly on on the the table, table, and and set set his his sunburnt sunburnt face face into into a a resolute resolute expression. expression. 'my 'my niece, niece, em'ly, em'ly, is is alive, alive, sir!' sir!' he he said, said, steadfastly. steadfastly. 'i 'i doen't doen't know know wheer wheer it it comes comes from, from, or or how how 'tis, 'tis, but but i i am am told told as as she's she's alive!' alive!' he he looked looked almost almost like like a a man man inspired, inspired, as as he he said said it. it. i i waited waited for for a a few few moments, moments, until until he he could could give give me me his his undivided undivided attention; attention; and and then then proceeded proceeded to to explain explain the the precaution, precaution, that, that, it it had had occurred occurred to to me me last last night, night, it it would would be be wise wise to to take. take. 'now, 'now, my my dear dear friend friend -- -- 'i 'i began. began. 'thankee, 'thankee, thankee, thankee, kind kind sir,' sir,' he he said, said, grasping grasping my my hand hand in in both both of of his. his. 'if 'if she she should should make make her her way way to to london, london, which which is is likely likely -- -- for for where where could could she she lose lose herself herself so so readily readily as as in in this this vast vast city; city; and and what what would would she she wish wish to to do, do, but but lose lose and and hide hide herself, herself, if if she she does does not not go go home? home? -- -- ' ' 'and 'and she she won't won't go go home,' home,' he he interposed, interposed, shaking shaking his his head head mournfully. mournfully. 'if 'if she she had had left left of of her her own own accord, accord, she she might; might; not not as as it it was, was, sir.' sir.' 'if 'if she she should should come come here,' here,' said said i, i, 'i 'i believe believe there there is is one one person, person, here, here, more more likely likely to to discover discover her her than than any any other other in in the the world. world. do do you remember remember -- -- hear hear what what i i say, say, with with fortitude fortitude -- -- think think of of your your great great object! object! -- -- do do you remember remember martha?' martha?' 'of 'of our our town?' town?' i i needed needed no no other other answer answer than than his his face. face. 'do 'do you know know that that she she is is in in london?' london?' 'i 'i have have seen seen her her in in the the streets,' streets,' he he answered, answered, with with a a shiver. shiver. 'but 'but you don't don't know,' know,' said said i, i, 'that 'that emily emily was was charitable charitable to to her, her, with with ham's ham's help, help, long long before before she she fled fled from from home. home. nor, nor, that, that, when when we we met met one one night, night, and and spoke spoke together together in in the the room room yonder, yonder, over over the the way, way, she she listened listened at at the the door.' door.' 'mas'r 'mas'r davy!' davy!' he he replied replied in in astonishment. astonishment. 'that 'that night night when when it it snew snew so so hard?' hard?' 'that 'that night. night. i i have have never never seen seen her her since. since. i i went went back, back, after after parting parting from from you, to to speak speak to to her, her, but but she she was was gone. gone. i i was was unwilling unwilling to to mention mention her her to to you then, then, and and i i am am now; now; but but she she is is the the person person of of whom whom i i speak, speak, and and with with whom whom i i think think we we should should communicate. communicate. do do you understand?' understand?' 'too 'too well, well, sir,' sir,' he he replied. replied. we we had had sunk sunk our our voices, voices, almost almost to to a a whisper, whisper, and and continued continued to to speak speak in in that that tone. tone. 'you say say you have have seen seen her. her. do do you think think that that you could could find find her? her? i i could could only only hope hope to to do do so so by by chance.' chance.' 'i 'i think, think, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, i i know know wheer wheer to to look.' look.' 'it 'it is is dark. dark. being being together, together, shall shall we we go go out out now, now, and and try try to to find find her her tonight?' tonight?' he he assented, assented, and and prepared prepared to to accompany accompany me. me. without without appearing appearing to to observe observe what what he he was was doing, doing, i i saw saw how how carefully carefully he he adjusted adjusted the the little little room, room, put put a a candle candle ready ready and and the the means means of of lighting lighting it, it, arranged arranged the the bed, bed, and and finally finally took took out out of of a a drawer drawer one one of of her her dresses dresses (i (i remember remember to to have have seen seen her her wear wear it), it), neatly neatly folded folded with with some some other other garments, garments, and and a a bonnet, bonnet, which which he he placed placed upon upon a a chair. chair. he he made made no no allusion allusion to to these these clothes, clothes, neither neither did did i. i. there there they they had had been been waiting waiting for for her, her, many many and and many many a a night, night, no no doubt. doubt. 'the 'the time time was, was, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he said, said, as as we we came came downstairs, downstairs, 'when 'when i i thowt thowt this this girl, girl, martha, martha, a'most a'most like like the the dirt dirt underneath underneath my my em'ly's em'ly's feet. feet. god god forgive forgive me, me, theer's theer's a a difference difference now!' now!' as as we we went went along, along, partly partly to to hold hold him him in in conversation, conversation, and and partly partly to to satisfy satisfy myself, myself, i i asked asked him him about about ham. ham. he he said, said, almost almost in in the the same same words words as as formerly, formerly, that that ham ham was was just just the the same, same, 'wearing 'wearing away away his his life life with with kiender kiender no no care care nohow nohow for for 't; 't; but but never never murmuring, murmuring, and and liked liked by by all'. all'. i i asked asked him him what what he he thought thought ham's ham's state state of of mind mind was, was, in in reference reference to to the the cause cause of of their their misfortunes? misfortunes? whether whether he he believed believed it it was was dangerous? dangerous? what what he he supposed, supposed, for for example, example, ham ham would would do, do, if if he he and and steerforth steerforth ever ever should should encounter? encounter? 'i 'i doen't doen't know, know, sir,' sir,' he he replied. replied. 'i 'i have have thowt thowt of of it it oftentimes, oftentimes, but but i i can't can't awize awize myself myself of of it, it, no no matters.' matters.' i i recalled recalled to to his his remembrance remembrance the the morning morning after after her her departure, departure, when when we we were were all all three three on on the the beach. beach. 'do 'do you recollect,' recollect,' said said i, i, 'a 'a certain certain wild wild way way in in which which he he looked looked out out to to sea, sea, and and spoke spoke about about "the "the end end of of it"?' it"?' 'sure 'sure i i do!' do!' said said he. he. 'what 'what do do you suppose suppose he he meant?' meant?' 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' he he replied, replied, 'i've 'i've put put the the question question to to myself myself a a mort mort o' o' times, times, and and never never found found no no answer. answer. and and theer's theer's one one curious curious thing thing -- -- that, that, though though he he is is so so pleasant, pleasant, i i wouldn't wouldn't fare fare to to feel feel comfortable comfortable to to try try and and get get his his mind mind upon upon 't. 't. he he never never said said a a wured wured to to me me as as warn't warn't as as dootiful dootiful as as dootiful dootiful could could be, be, and and it it ain't ain't likely likely as as he'd he'd begin begin to to speak speak any any other other ways ways now; now; but but it's it's fur fur from from being being fleet fleet water water in in his his mind, mind, where where them them thowts thowts lays. lays. it's it's deep, deep, sir, sir, and and i i can't can't see see down.' down.' 'you are are right,' right,' said said i, i, 'and 'and that that has has sometimes sometimes made made me me anxious.' anxious.' 'and 'and me me too, too, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he rejoined. rejoined. 'even 'even more more so, so, i i do do assure assure you, than than his his ventersome ventersome ways, ways, though though both both belongs belongs to to the the alteration alteration in in him. him. i i doen't doen't know know as as he'd he'd do do violence violence under under any any circumstances, circumstances, but but i i hope hope as as them them two two may may be be kep kep asunders.' asunders.' we we had had come, come, through through temple temple bar, bar, into into the the city. city. conversing conversing no no more more now, now, and and walking walking at at my my side, side, he he yielded yielded himself himself up up to to the the one one aim aim of of his his devoted devoted life, life, and and went went on, on, with with that that hushed hushed concentration concentration of of his his faculties faculties which which would would have have made made his his figure figure solitary solitary in in a a multitude. multitude. we we were were not not far far from from blackfriars blackfriars bridge, bridge, when when he he turned turned his his head head and and pointed pointed to to a a solitary solitary female female figure figure flitting flitting along along the the opposite opposite side side of of the the street. street. i i knew knew it, it, readily, readily, to to be be the the figure figure that that we we sought. sought. we we crossed crossed the the road, road, and and were were pressing pressing on on towards towards her, her, when when it it occurred occurred to to me me that that she she might might be be more more disposed disposed to to feel feel a a woman's woman's interest interest in in the the lost lost girl, girl, if if we we spoke spoke to to her her in in a a quieter quieter place, place, aloof aloof from from the the crowd, crowd, and and where where we we should should be be less less observed. observed. i i advised advised my my companion, companion, therefore, therefore, that that we we should should not not address address her her yet, yet, but but follow follow her; her; consulting consulting in in this, this, likewise, likewise, an an indistinct indistinct desire desire i i had, had, to to know know where where she she went. went. he he acquiescing, acquiescing, we we followed followed at at a a distance: distance: never never losing losing sight sight of of her, her, but but never never caring caring to to come come very very near, near, as as she she frequently frequently looked looked about. about. once, once, she she stopped stopped to to listen listen to to a a band band of of music; music; and and then then we we stopped stopped too. too. she she went went on on a a long long way. way. still still we we went went on. on. it it was was evident, evident, from from the the manner manner in in which which she she held held her her course, course, that that she she was was going going to to some some fixed fixed destination; destination; and and this, this, and and her her keeping keeping in in the the busy busy streets, streets, and and i i suppose suppose the the strange strange fascination fascination in in the the secrecy secrecy and and mystery mystery of of so so following following anyone, anyone, made made me me adhere adhere to to my my first first purpose. purpose. at at length length she she turned turned into into a a dull, dull, dark dark street, street, where where the the noise noise and and crowd crowd were were lost; lost; and and i i said, said, 'we 'we may may speak speak to to her her now'; now'; and, and, mending mending our our pace, pace, we we went went after after her. her. chapter chapter 47. 47. martha martha we we were were now now down down in in westminster. westminster. we we had had turned turned back back to to follow follow her, her, having having encountered encountered her her coming coming towards towards us; us; and and westminster westminster abbey abbey was was the the point point at at which which she she passed passed from from the the lights lights and and noise noise of of the the leading leading streets. streets. she she proceeded proceeded so so quickly, quickly, when when she she got got free free of of the the two two currents currents of of passengers passengers setting setting towards towards and and from from the the bridge, bridge, that, that, between between this this and and the the advance advance she she had had of of us us when when she she struck struck off, off, we we were were in in the the narrow narrow water-side water-side street street by by millbank millbank before before we we came came up up with with her. her. at at that that moment moment she she crossed crossed the the road, road, as as if if to to avoid avoid the the footsteps footsteps that that she she heard heard so so close close behind; behind; and, and, without without looking looking back, back, passed passed on on even even more more rapidly. rapidly. a a glimpse glimpse of of the the river river through through a a dull dull gateway, gateway, where where some some waggons waggons were were housed housed for for the the night, night, seemed seemed to to arrest arrest my my feet. feet. i i touched touched my my companion companion without without speaking, speaking, and and we we both both forbore forbore to to cross cross after after her, her, and and both both followed followed on on that that opposite opposite side side of of the the way; way; keeping keeping as as quietly quietly as as we we could could in in the the shadow shadow of of the the houses, houses, but but keeping keeping very very near near her. her. there there was, was, and and is is when when i i write, write, at at the the end end of of that that low-lying low-lying street, street, a a dilapidated dilapidated little little wooden wooden building, building, probably probably an an obsolete obsolete old old ferry-house. ferry-house. its its position position is is just just at at that that point point where where the the street street ceases, ceases, and and the the road road begins begins to to lie lie between between a a row row of of houses houses and and the the river. river. as as soon soon as as she she came came here, here, and and saw saw the the water, water, she she stopped stopped as as if if she she had had come come to to her her destination; destination; and and presently presently went went slowly slowly along along by by the the brink brink of of the the river, river, looking looking intently intently at at it. it. all all the the way way here, here, i i had had supposed supposed that that she she was was going going to to some some house; house; indeed, indeed, i i had had vaguely vaguely entertained entertained the the hope hope that that the the house house might might be be in in some some way way associated associated with with the the lost lost girl. girl. but but that that one one dark dark glimpse glimpse of of the the river, river, through through the the gateway, gateway, had had instinctively instinctively prepared prepared me me for for her her going going no no farther. farther. the the neighbourhood neighbourhood was was a a dreary dreary one one at at that that time; time; as as oppressive, oppressive, sad, sad, and and solitary solitary by by night, night, as as any any about about london. london. there there were were neither neither wharves wharves nor nor houses houses on on the the melancholy melancholy waste waste of of road road near near the the great great blank blank prison. prison. a a sluggish sluggish ditch ditch deposited deposited its its mud mud at at the the prison prison walls. walls. coarse coarse grass grass and and rank rank weeds weeds straggled straggled over over all all the the marshy marshy land land in in the the vicinity. vicinity. in in one one part, part, carcases carcases of of houses, houses, inauspiciously inauspiciously begun begun and and never never finished, finished, rotted rotted away. away. in in another, another, the the ground ground was was cumbered cumbered with with rusty rusty iron iron monsters monsters of of steam-boilers, steam-boilers, wheels, wheels, cranks, cranks, pipes, pipes, furnaces, furnaces, paddles, paddles, anchors, anchors, diving-bells, diving-bells, windmill-sails, windmill-sails, and and i i know know not not what what strange strange objects, objects, accumulated accumulated by by some some speculator, speculator, and and grovelling grovelling in in the the dust, dust, underneath underneath which which -- -- having having sunk sunk into into the the soil soil of of their their own own weight weight in in wet wet weather weather -- -- they they had had the the appearance appearance of of vainly vainly trying trying to to hide hide themselves. themselves. the the clash clash and and glare glare of of sundry sundry fiery fiery works works upon upon the the river-side, river-side, arose arose by by night night to to disturb disturb everything everything except except the the heavy heavy and and unbroken unbroken smoke smoke that that poured poured out out of of their their chimneys. chimneys. slimy slimy gaps gaps and and causeways, causeways, winding winding among among old old wooden wooden piles, piles, with with a a sickly sickly substance substance clinging clinging to to the the latter, latter, like like green green hair, hair, and and the the rags rags of of last last year's year's handbills handbills offering offering rewards rewards for for drowned drowned men men fluttering fluttering above above high-water high-water mark, mark, led led down down through through the the ooze ooze and and slush slush to to the the ebb-tide. ebb-tide. there there was was a a story story that that one one of of the the pits pits dug dug for for the the dead dead in in the the time time of of the the great great plague plague was was hereabout; hereabout; and and a a blighting blighting influence influence seemed seemed to to have have proceeded proceeded from from it it over over the the whole whole place. place. or or else else it it looked looked as as if if it it had had gradually gradually decomposed decomposed into into that that nightmare nightmare condition, condition, out out of of the the overflowings overflowings of of the the polluted polluted stream. stream. as as if if she she were were a a part part of of the the refuse refuse it it had had cast cast out, out, and and left left to to corruption corruption and and decay, decay, the the girl girl we we had had followed followed strayed strayed down down to to the the river's river's brink, brink, and and stood stood in in the the midst midst of of this this night-picture, night-picture, lonely lonely and and still, still, looking looking at at the the water. water. there there were were some some boats boats and and barges barges astrand astrand in in the the mud, mud, and and these these enabled enabled us us to to come come within within a a few few yards yards of of her her without without being being seen. seen. i i then then signed signed to to mr. mr. peggotty peggotty to to remain remain where where he he was, was, and and emerged emerged from from their their shade shade to to speak speak to to her. her. i i did did not not approach approach her her solitary solitary figure figure without without trembling; trembling; for for this this gloomy gloomy end end to to her her determined determined walk, walk, and and the the way way in in which which she she stood, stood, almost almost within within the the cavernous cavernous shadow shadow of of the the iron iron bridge, bridge, looking looking at at the the lights lights crookedly crookedly reflected reflected in in the the strong strong tide, tide, inspired inspired a a dread dread within within me. me. i i think think she she was was talking talking to to herself. herself. i i am am sure, sure, although although absorbed absorbed in in gazing gazing at at the the water, water, that that her her shawl shawl was was off off her her shoulders, shoulders, and and that that she she was was muffling muffling her her hands hands in in it, it, in in an an unsettled unsettled and and bewildered bewildered way, way, more more like like the the action action of of a a sleep-walker sleep-walker than than a a waking waking person. person. i i know, know, and and never never can can forget, forget, that that there there was was that that in in her her wild wild manner manner which which gave gave me me no no assurance assurance but but that that she she would would sink sink before before my my eyes, eyes, until until i i had had her her arm arm within within my my grasp. grasp. at at the the same same moment moment i i said said 'martha!' 'martha!' she she uttered uttered a a terrified terrified scream, scream, and and struggled struggled with with me me with with such such strength strength that that i i doubt doubt if if i i could could have have held held her her alone. alone. but but a a stronger stronger hand hand than than mine mine was was laid laid upon upon her; her; and and when when she she raised raised her her frightened frightened eyes eyes and and saw saw whose whose it it was, was, she she made made but but one one more more effort effort and and dropped dropped down down between between us. us. we we carried carried her her away away from from the the water water to to where where there there were were some some dry dry stones, stones, and and there there laid laid her her down, down, crying crying and and moaning. moaning. in in a a little little while while she she sat sat among among the the stones, stones, holding holding her her wretched wretched head head with with both both her her hands. hands. 'oh, 'oh, the the river!' river!' she she cried cried passionately. passionately. 'oh, 'oh, the the river!' river!' 'hush, 'hush, hush!' hush!' said said i. i. 'calm 'calm yourself.' yourself.' but but she she still still repeated repeated the the same same words, words, continually continually exclaiming, exclaiming, 'oh, 'oh, the the river!' river!' over over and and over over again. again. 'i 'i know know it's it's like like me!' me!' she she exclaimed. exclaimed. 'i 'i know know that that i i belong belong to to it. it. i i know know that that it's it's the the natural natural company company of of such such as as i i am! am! it it comes comes from from country country places, places, where where there there was was once once no no harm harm in in it it -- -- and and it it creeps creeps through through the the dismal dismal streets, streets, defiled defiled and and miserable miserable -- -- and and it it goes goes away, away, like like my my life, life, to to a a great great sea, sea, that that is is always always troubled troubled -- -- and and i i feel feel that that i i must must go go with with it!' it!' i i have have never never known known what what despair despair was, was, except except in in the the tone tone of of those those words. words. 'i 'i can't can't keep keep away away from from it. it. i i can't can't forget forget it. it. it it haunts haunts me me day day and and night. night. it's it's the the only only thing thing in in all all the the world world that that i i am am fit fit for, for, or or that's that's fit fit for for me. me. oh, oh, the the dreadful dreadful river!' river!' the the thought thought passed passed through through my my mind mind that that in in the the face face of of my my companion, companion, as as he he looked looked upon upon her her without without speech speech or or motion, motion, i i might might have have read read his his niece's niece's history, history, if if i i had had known known nothing nothing of of it. it. i i never never saw, saw, in in any any painting painting or or reality, reality, horror horror and and compassion compassion so so impressively impressively blended. blended. he he shook shook as as if if he he would would have have fallen; fallen; and and his his hand hand -- -- i i touched touched it it with with my my own, own, for for his his appearance appearance alarmed alarmed me me -- -- was was deadly deadly cold. cold. 'she 'she is is in in a a state state of of frenzy,' frenzy,' i i whispered whispered to to him. him. 'she 'she will will speak speak differently differently in in a a little little time.' time.' i i don't don't know know what what he he would would have have said said in in answer. answer. he he made made some some motion motion with with his his mouth, mouth, and and seemed seemed to to think think he he had had spoken; spoken; but but he he had had only only pointed pointed to to her her with with his his outstretched outstretched hand. hand. a a new new burst burst of of crying crying came came upon upon her her now, now, in in which which she she once once more more hid hid her her face face among among the the stones, stones, and and lay lay before before us, us, a a prostrate prostrate image image of of humiliation humiliation and and ruin. ruin. knowing knowing that that this this state state must must pass, pass, before before we we could could speak speak to to her her with with any any hope, hope, i i ventured ventured to to restrain restrain him him when when he he would would have have raised raised her, her, and and we we stood stood by by in in silence silence until until she she became became more more tranquil. tranquil. 'martha,' 'martha,' said said i i then, then, leaning leaning down, down, and and helping helping her her to to rise rise -- -- she she seemed seemed to to want want to to rise rise as as if if with with the the intention intention of of going going away, away, but but she she was was weak, weak, and and leaned leaned against against a a boat. boat. 'do 'do you know know who who this this is, is, who who is is with with me?' me?' she she said said faintly, faintly, 'yes.' 'yes.' 'do 'do you know know that that we we have have followed followed you a a long long way way tonight?' tonight?' she she shook shook her her head. head. she she looked looked neither neither at at him him nor nor at at me, me, but but stood stood in in a a humble humble attitude, attitude, holding holding her her bonnet bonnet and and shawl shawl in in one one hand, hand, without without appearing appearing conscious conscious of of them, them, and and pressing pressing the the other, other, clenched, clenched, against against her her forehead. forehead. 'are 'are you composed composed enough,' enough,' said said i, i, 'to 'to speak speak on on the the subject subject which which so so interested interested you -- -- i i hope hope heaven heaven may may remember remember it! it! -- -- that that snowy snowy night?' night?' her her sobs sobs broke broke out out afresh, afresh, and and she she murmured murmured some some inarticulate inarticulate thanks thanks to to me me for for not not having having driven driven her her away away from from the the door. door. 'i 'i want want to to say say nothing nothing for for myself,' myself,' she she said, said, after after a a few few moments. moments. 'i 'i am am bad, bad, i i am am lost. lost. i i have have no no hope hope at at all. all. but but tell tell him, him, sir,' sir,' she she had had shrunk shrunk away away from from him, him, 'if 'if you don't don't feel feel too too hard hard to to me me to to do do it, it, that that i i never never was was in in any any way way the the cause cause of of his his misfortune.' misfortune.' 'it 'it has has never never been been attributed attributed to to you,' i i returned, returned, earnestly earnestly responding responding to to her her earnestness. earnestness. 'it 'it was was you, if if i i don't don't deceive deceive myself,' myself,' she she said, said, in in a a broken broken voice, voice, 'that 'that came came into into the the kitchen, kitchen, the the night night she she took took such such pity pity on on me; me; was was so so gentle gentle to to me; me; didn't didn't shrink shrink away away from from me me like like all all the the rest, rest, and and gave gave me me such such kind kind help! help! was was it it you, sir?' sir?' 'it 'it was,' was,' said said i. i. 'i 'i should should have have been been in in the the river river long long ago,' ago,' she she said, said, glancing glancing at at it it with with a a terrible terrible expression, expression, 'if 'if any any wrong wrong to to her her had had been been upon upon my my mind. mind. i i never never could could have have kept kept out out of of it it a a single single winter's winter's night, night, if if i i had had not not been been free free of of any any share share in in that!' that!' 'the 'the cause cause of of her her flight flight is is too too well well understood,' understood,' i i said. said. 'you are are innocent innocent of of any any part part in in it, it, we we thoroughly thoroughly believe, believe, -- -- we we know.' know.' 'oh, 'oh, i i might might have have been been much much the the better better for for her, her, if if i i had had had had a a better better heart!' heart!' exclaimed exclaimed the the girl, girl, with with most most forlorn forlorn regret; regret; 'for 'for she she was was always always good good to to me! me! she she never never spoke spoke a a word word to to me me but but what what was was pleasant pleasant and and right. right. is is it it likely likely i i would would try try to to make make her her what what i i am am myself, myself, knowing knowing what what i i am am myself, myself, so so well? well? when when i i lost lost everything everything that that makes makes life life dear, dear, the the worst worst of of all all my my thoughts thoughts was was that that i i was was parted parted for for ever ever from from her!' her!' mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, standing standing with with one one hand hand on on the the gunwale gunwale of of the the boat, boat, and and his his eyes eyes cast cast down, down, put put his his disengaged disengaged hand hand before before his his face. face. 'and 'and when when i i heard heard what what had had happened happened before before that that snowy snowy night, night, from from some some belonging belonging to to our our town,' town,' cried cried martha, martha, 'the 'the bitterest bitterest thought thought in in all all my my mind mind was, was, that that the the people people would would remember remember she she once once kept kept company company with with me, me, and and would would say say i i had had corrupted corrupted her! her! when, when, heaven heaven knows, knows, i i would would have have died died to to have have brought brought back back her her good good name!' name!' long long unused unused to to any any self-control, self-control, the the piercing piercing agony agony of of her her remorse remorse and and grief grief was was terrible. terrible. 'to 'to have have died, died, would would not not have have been been much much -- -- what what can can i i say? say? -- -- -i -i would would have have lived!' lived!' she she cried. cried. 'i 'i would would have have lived lived to to be be old, old, in in the the wretched wretched streets streets -- -- and and to to wander wander about, about, avoided, avoided, in in the the dark dark -- -- and and to to see see the the day day break break on on the the ghastly ghastly line line of of houses, houses, and and remember remember how how the the same same sun sun used used to to shine shine into into my my room, room, and and wake wake me me once once -- -- i i would would have have done done even even that, that, to to save save her!' her!' sinking sinking on on the the stones, stones, she she took took some some in in each each hand, hand, and and clenched clenched them them up, up, as as if if she she would would have have ground ground them. them. she she writhed writhed into into some some new new posture posture constantly: constantly: stiffening stiffening her her arms, arms, twisting twisting them them before before her her face, face, as as though though to to shut shut out out from from her her eyes eyes the the little little light light there there was, was, and and drooping drooping her her head, head, as as if if it it were were heavy heavy with with insupportable insupportable recollections. recollections. 'what 'what shall shall i i ever ever do!' do!' she she said, said, fighting fighting thus thus with with her her despair. despair. 'how 'how can can i i go go on on as as i i am, am, a a solitary solitary curse curse to to myself, myself, a a living living disgrace disgrace to to everyone everyone i i come come near!' near!' suddenly suddenly she she turned turned to to my my companion. companion. 'stamp 'stamp upon upon me, me, kill kill me! me! when when she she was was your your pride, pride, you would would have have thought thought i i had had done done her her harm harm if if i i had had brushed brushed against against her her in in the the street. street. you can't can't believe believe -- -- why why should should you? -- -- -a -a syllable syllable that that comes comes out out of of my my lips. lips. it it would would be be a a burning burning shame shame upon upon you, even even now, now, if if she she and and i i exchanged exchanged a a word. word. i i don't don't complain. complain. i i don't don't say say she she and and i i are are alike alike -- -- i i know know there there is is a a long, long, long long way way between between us. us. i i only only say, say, with with all all my my guilt guilt and and wretchedness wretchedness upon upon my my head, head, that that i i am am grateful grateful to to her her from from my my soul, soul, and and love love her. her. oh, oh, don't don't think think that that all all the the power power i i had had of of loving loving anything anything is is quite quite worn worn out! out! throw throw me me away, away, as as all all the the world world does. does. kill kill me me for for being being what what i i am, am, and and having having ever ever known known her; her; but but don't don't think think that that of of me!' me!' he he looked looked upon upon her, her, while while she she made made this this supplication, supplication, in in a a wild wild distracted distracted manner; manner; and, and, when when she she was was silent, silent, gently gently raised raised her. her. 'martha,' 'martha,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'god 'god forbid forbid as as i i should should judge judge you. forbid forbid as as i, i, of of all all men, men, should should do do that, that, my my girl! girl! you doen't doen't know know half half the the change change that's that's come, come, in in course course of of time, time, upon upon me, me, when when you think think it it likely. likely. well!' well!' he he paused paused a a moment, moment, then then went went on. on. 'you doen't doen't understand understand how how 'tis 'tis that that this this here here gentleman gentleman and and me me has has wished wished to to speak speak to to you. you doen't doen't understand understand what what 'tis 'tis we we has has afore afore us. us. listen listen now!' now!' his his influence influence upon upon her her was was complete. complete. she she stood, stood, shrinkingly, shrinkingly, before before him, him, as as if if she she were were afraid afraid to to meet meet his his eyes; eyes; but but her her passionate passionate sorrow sorrow was was quite quite hushed hushed and and mute. mute. 'if 'if you heerd,' heerd,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'owt 'owt of of what what passed passed between between mas'r mas'r davy davy and and me, me, th' th' night night when when it it snew snew so so hard, hard, you know know as as i i have have been been -- -- wheer wheer not not -- -- fur fur to to seek seek my my dear dear niece. niece. my my dear dear niece,' niece,' he he repeated repeated steadily. steadily. 'fur 'fur she's she's more more dear dear to to me me now, now, martha, martha, than than she she was was dear dear afore.' afore.' she she put put her her hands hands before before her her face; face; but but otherwise otherwise remained remained quiet. quiet. 'i 'i have have heerd heerd her her tell,' tell,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'as 'as you was was early early left left fatherless fatherless and and motherless, motherless, with with no no friend friend fur fur to to take, take, in in a a rough rough seafaring-way, seafaring-way, their their place. place. maybe maybe you can can guess guess that that if if you'd you'd had had such such a a friend, friend, you'd you'd have have got got into into a a way way of of being being fond fond of of him him in in course course of of time, time, and and that that my my niece niece was was kiender kiender daughter-like daughter-like to to me.' me.' as as she she was was silently silently trembling, trembling, he he put put her her shawl shawl carefully carefully about about her, her, taking taking it it up up from from the the ground ground for for that that purpose. purpose. 'whereby,' 'whereby,' said said he, he, 'i 'i know, know, both both as as she she would would go go to to the the wureld's wureld's furdest furdest end end with with me, me, if if she she could could once once see see me me again; again; and and that that she she would would fly fly to to the the wureld's wureld's furdest furdest end end to to keep keep off off seeing seeing me. me. for for though though she she ain't ain't no no call call to to doubt doubt my my love, love, and and doen't doen't -- -- and and doen't,' doen't,' he he repeated, repeated, with with a a quiet quiet assurance assurance of of the the truth truth of of what what he he said, said, 'there's 'there's shame shame steps steps in, in, and and keeps keeps betwixt betwixt us.' us.' i i read, read, in in every every word word of of his his plain plain impressive impressive way way of of delivering delivering himself, himself, new new evidence evidence of of his his having having thought thought of of this this one one topic, topic, in in every every feature feature it it presented. presented. 'according 'according to to our our reckoning,' reckoning,' he he proceeded, proceeded, 'mas'r 'mas'r davy's davy's here, here, and and mine, mine, she she is is like, like, one one day, day, to to make make her her own own poor poor solitary solitary course course to to london. london. we we believe believe -- -- mas'r mas'r davy, davy, me, me, and and all all of of us us -- -- that that you are are as as innocent innocent of of everything everything that that has has befell befell her, her, as as the the unborn unborn child. child. you've you've spoke spoke of of her her being being pleasant, pleasant, kind, kind, and and gentle gentle to to you. bless bless her, her, i i knew knew she she was! was! i i knew knew she she always always was, was, to to all. all. you're you're thankful thankful to to her, her, and and you love love her. her. help help us us all all you can can to to find find her, her, and and may may heaven heaven reward reward you!' she she looked looked at at him him hastily, hastily, and and for for the the first first time, time, as as if if she she were were doubtful doubtful of of what what he he had had said. said. 'will 'will you trust trust me?' me?' she she asked, asked, in in a a low low voice voice of of astonishment. astonishment. 'full 'full and and free!' free!' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'to 'to speak speak to to her, her, if if i i should should ever ever find find her; her; shelter shelter her, her, if if i i have have any any shelter shelter to to divide divide with with her; her; and and then, then, without without her her knowledge, knowledge, come come to to you, and and bring bring you to to her?' her?' she she asked asked hurriedly. hurriedly. we we both both replied replied together, together, 'yes!' 'yes!' she she lifted lifted up up her her eyes, eyes, and and solemnly solemnly declared declared that that she she would would devote devote herself herself to to this this task, task, fervently fervently and and faithfully. faithfully. that that she she would would never never waver waver in in it, it, never never be be diverted diverted from from it, it, never never relinquish relinquish it, it, while while there there was was any any chance chance of of hope. hope. if if she she were were not not true true to to it, it, might might the the object object she she now now had had in in life, life, which which bound bound her her to to something something devoid devoid of of evil, evil, in in its its passing passing away away from from her, her, leave leave her her more more forlorn forlorn and and more more despairing, despairing, if if that that were were possible, possible, than than she she had had been been upon upon the the river's river's brink brink that that night; night; and and then then might might all all help, help, human human and and divine, divine, renounce renounce her her evermore! evermore! she she did did not not raise raise her her voice voice above above her her breath, breath, or or address address us, us, but but said said this this to to the the night night sky; sky; then then stood stood profoundly profoundly quiet, quiet, looking looking at at the the gloomy gloomy water. water. we we judged judged it it expedient, expedient, now, now, to to tell tell her her all all we we knew; knew; which which i i recounted recounted at at length. length. she she listened listened with with great great attention, attention, and and with with a a face face that that often often changed, changed, but but had had the the same same purpose purpose in in all all its its varying varying expressions. expressions. her her eyes eyes occasionally occasionally filled filled with with tears, tears, but but those those she she repressed. repressed. it it seemed seemed as as if if her her spirit spirit were were quite quite altered, altered, and and she she could could not not be be too too quiet. quiet. she she asked, asked, when when all all was was told, told, where where we we were were to to be be communicated communicated with, with, if if occasion occasion should should arise. arise. under under a a dull dull lamp lamp in in the the road, road, i i wrote wrote our our two two addresses addresses on on a a leaf leaf of of my my pocket-book, pocket-book, which which i i tore tore out out and and gave gave to to her, her, and and which which she she put put in in her her poor poor bosom. bosom. i i asked asked her her where where she she lived lived herself. herself. she she said, said, after after a a pause, pause, in in no no place place long. long. it it were were better better not not to to know. know. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty suggesting suggesting to to me, me, in in a a whisper, whisper, what what had had already already occurred occurred to to myself, myself, i i took took out out my my purse; purse; but but i i could could not not prevail prevail upon upon her her to to accept accept any any money, money, nor nor could could i i exact exact any any promise promise from from her her that that she she would would do do so so at at another another time. time. i i represented represented to to her her that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty could could not not be be called, called, for for one one in in his his condition, condition, poor; poor; and and that that the the idea idea of of her her engaging engaging in in this this search, search, while while depending depending on on her her own own resources, resources, shocked shocked us us both. both. she she continued continued steadfast. steadfast. in in this this particular, particular, his his influence influence upon upon her her was was equally equally powerless powerless with with mine. mine. she she gratefully gratefully thanked thanked him him but but remained remained inexorable. inexorable. 'there 'there may may be be work work to to be be got,' got,' she she said. said. 'i'll 'i'll try.' try.' 'at 'at least least take take some some assistance,' assistance,' i i returned, returned, 'until 'until you have have tried.' tried.' 'i 'i could could not not do do what what i i have have promised, promised, for for money,' money,' she she replied. replied. 'i 'i could could not not take take it, it, if if i i was was starving. starving. to to give give me me money money would would be be to to take take away away your your trust, trust, to to take take away away the the object object that that you have have given given me, me, to to take take away away the the only only certain certain thing thing that that saves saves me me from from the the river.' river.' 'in 'in the the name name of of the the great great judge,' judge,' said said i, i, 'before 'before whom whom you and and all all of of us us must must stand stand at at his his dread dread time, time, dismiss dismiss that that terrible terrible idea! idea! we we can can all all do do some some good, good, if if we we will.' will.' she she trembled, trembled, and and her her lip lip shook, shook, and and her her face face was was paler, paler, as as she she answered: answered: 'it 'it has has been been put put into into your your hearts, hearts, perhaps, perhaps, to to save save a a wretched wretched creature creature for for repentance. repentance. i i am am afraid afraid to to think think so; so; it it seems seems too too bold. bold. if if any any good good should should come come of of me, me, i i might might begin begin to to hope; hope; for for nothing nothing but but harm harm has has ever ever come come of of my my deeds deeds yet. yet. i i am am to to be be trusted, trusted, for for the the first first time time in in a a long long while, while, with with my my miserable miserable life, life, on on account account of of what what you have have given given me me to to try try for. for. i i know know no no more, more, and and i i can can say say no no more.' more.' again again she she repressed repressed the the tears tears that that had had begun begun to to flow; flow; and, and, putting putting out out her her trembling trembling hand, hand, and and touching touching mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, as as if if there there was was some some healing healing virtue virtue in in him, him, went went away away along along the the desolate desolate road. road. she she had had been been ill, ill, probably probably for for a a long long time. time. i i observed, observed, upon upon that that closer closer opportunity opportunity of of observation, observation, that that she she was was worn worn and and haggard, haggard, and and that that her her sunken sunken eyes eyes expressed expressed privation privation and and endurance. endurance. we we followed followed her her at at a a short short distance, distance, our our way way lying lying in in the the same same direction, direction, until until we we came came back back into into the the lighted lighted and and populous populous streets. streets. i i had had such such implicit implicit confidence confidence in in her her declaration, declaration, that that i i then then put put it it to to mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, whether whether it it would would not not seem, seem, in in the the onset, onset, like like distrusting distrusting her, her, to to follow follow her her any any farther. farther. he he being being of of the the same same mind, mind, and and equally equally reliant reliant on on her, her, we we suffered suffered her her to to take take her her own own road, road, and and took took ours, ours, which which was was towards towards highgate. highgate. he he accompanied accompanied me me a a good good part part of of the the way; way; and and when when we we parted, parted, with with a a prayer prayer for for the the success success of of this this fresh fresh effort, effort, there there was was a a new new and and thoughtful thoughtful compassion compassion in in him him that that i i was was at at no no loss loss to to interpret. interpret. it it was was midnight midnight when when i i arrived arrived at at home. home. i i had had reached reached my my own own gate, gate, and and was was standing standing listening listening for for the the deep deep bell bell of of st. st. paul's, paul's, the the sound sound of of which which i i thought thought had had been been borne borne towards towards me me among among the the multitude multitude of of striking striking clocks, clocks, when when i i was was rather rather surprised surprised to to see see that that the the door door of of my my aunt's aunt's cottage cottage was was open, open, and and that that a a faint faint light light in in the the entry entry was was shining shining out out across across the the road. road. thinking thinking that that my my aunt aunt might might have have relapsed relapsed into into one one of of her her old old alarms, alarms, and and might might be be watching watching the the progress progress of of some some imaginary imaginary conflagration conflagration in in the the distance, distance, i i went went to to speak speak to to her. her. it it was was with with very very great great surprise surprise that that i i saw saw a a man man standing standing in in her her little little garden. garden. he he had had a a glass glass and and bottle bottle in in his his hand, hand, and and was was in in the the act act of of drinking. drinking. i i stopped stopped short, short, among among the the thick thick foliage foliage outside, outside, for for the the moon moon was was up up now, now, though though obscured; obscured; and and i i recognized recognized the the man man whom whom i i had had once once supposed supposed to to be be a a delusion delusion of of mr. mr. dick's, dick's, and and had had once once encountered encountered with with my my aunt aunt in in the the streets streets of of the the city. city. he he was was eating eating as as well well as as drinking, drinking, and and seemed seemed to to eat eat with with a a hungry hungry appetite. appetite. he he seemed seemed curious curious regarding regarding the the cottage, cottage, too, too, as as if if it it were were the the first first time time he he had had seen seen it. it. after after stooping stooping to to put put the the bottle bottle on on the the ground, ground, he he looked looked up up at at the the windows, windows, and and looked looked about; about; though though with with a a covert covert and and impatient impatient air, air, as as if if he he was was anxious anxious to to be be gone. gone. the the light light in in the the passage passage was was obscured obscured for for a a moment, moment, and and my my aunt aunt came came out. out. she she was was agitated, agitated, and and told told some some money money into into his his hand. hand. i i heard heard it it chink. chink. 'what's 'what's the the use use of of this?' this?' he he demanded. demanded. 'i 'i can can spare spare no no more,' more,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'then 'then i i can't can't go,' go,' said said he. he. 'here! 'here! you may may take take it it back!' back!' 'you bad bad man,' man,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, with with great great emotion; emotion; 'how 'how can can you use use me me so? so? but but why why do do i i ask? ask? it it is is because because you know know how how weak weak i i am! am! what what have have i i to to do, do, to to free free myself myself for for ever ever of of your your visits, visits, but but to to abandon abandon you to to your your deserts?' deserts?' 'and 'and why why don't don't you abandon abandon me me to to my my deserts?' deserts?' said said he. he. 'you ask ask me me why!' why!' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'what 'what a a heart heart you must must have!' have!' he he stood stood moodily moodily rattling rattling the the money, money, and and shaking shaking his his head, head, until until at at length length he he said: said: 'is 'is this this all all you mean mean to to give give me, me, then?' then?' 'it 'it is is all all i i can can give give you,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'you know know i i have have had had losses, losses, and and am am poorer poorer than than i i used used to to be. be. i i have have told told you so. so. having having got got it, it, why why do do you give give me me the the pain pain of of looking looking at at you for for another another moment, moment, and and seeing seeing what what you have have become?' become?' 'i 'i have have become become shabby shabby enough, enough, if if you mean mean that,' that,' he he said. said. 'i 'i lead lead the the life life of of an an owl.' owl.' 'you stripped stripped me me of of the the greater greater part part of of all all i i ever ever had,' had,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'you closed closed my my heart heart against against the the whole whole world, world, years years and and years. years. you treated treated me me falsely, falsely, ungratefully, ungratefully, and and cruelly. cruelly. go, go, and and repent repent of of it. it. don't don't add add new new injuries injuries to to the the long, long, long long list list of of injuries injuries you have have done done me!' me!' 'aye!' 'aye!' he he returned. returned. 'it's 'it's all all very very fine fine -- -- well! well! i i must must do do the the best best i i can, can, for for the the present, present, i i suppose.' suppose.' in in spite spite of of himself, himself, he he appeared appeared abashed abashed by by my my aunt's aunt's indignant indignant tears, tears, and and came came slouching slouching out out of of the the garden. garden. taking taking two two or or three three quick quick steps, steps, as as if if i i had had just just come come up, up, i i met met him him at at the the gate, gate, and and went went in in as as he he came came out. out. we we eyed eyed one one another another narrowly narrowly in in passing, passing, and and with with no no favour. favour. 'aunt,' 'aunt,' said said i, i, hurriedly. hurriedly. 'this 'this man man alarming alarming you again! again! let let me me speak speak to to him. him. who who is is he?' he?' 'child,' 'child,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, taking taking my my arm, arm, 'come 'come in, in, and and don't don't speak speak to to me me for for ten ten minutes.' minutes.' we we sat sat down down in in her her little little parlour. parlour. my my aunt aunt retired retired behind behind the the round round green green fan fan of of former former days, days, which which was was screwed screwed on on the the back back of of a a chair, chair, and and occasionally occasionally wiped wiped her her eyes, eyes, for for about about a a quarter quarter of of an an hour. hour. then then she she came came out, out, and and took took a a seat seat beside beside me. me. 'trot,' 'trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, calmly, calmly, 'it's 'it's my my husband.' husband.' 'your 'your husband, husband, aunt? aunt? i i thought thought he he had had been been dead!' dead!' 'dead 'dead to to me,' me,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'but 'but living.' living.' i i sat sat in in silent silent amazement. amazement. 'betsey 'betsey trotwood trotwood don't don't look look a a likely likely subject subject for for the the tender tender passion,' passion,' said said my my aunt, aunt, composedly, composedly, 'but 'but the the time time was, was, trot, trot, when when she she believed believed in in that that man man most most entirely. entirely. when when she she loved loved him, him, trot, trot, right right well. well. when when there there was was no no proof proof of of attachment attachment and and affection affection that that she she would would not not have have given given him. him. he he repaid repaid her her by by breaking breaking her her fortune, fortune, and and nearly nearly breaking breaking her her heart. heart. so so she she put put all all that that sort sort of of sentiment, sentiment, once once and and for for ever, ever, in in a a grave, grave, and and filled filled it it up, up, and and flattened flattened it it down.' down.' 'my 'my dear, dear, good good aunt!' aunt!' 'i 'i left left him,' him,' my my aunt aunt proceeded, proceeded, laying laying her her hand hand as as usual usual on on the the back back of of mine, mine, 'generously. 'generously. i i may may say say at at this this distance distance of of time, time, trot, trot, that that i i left left him him generously. generously. he he had had been been so so cruel cruel to to me, me, that that i i might might have have effected effected a a separation separation on on easy easy terms terms for for myself; myself; but but i i did did not. not. he he soon soon made made ducks ducks and and drakes drakes of of what what i i gave gave him, him, sank sank lower lower and and lower, lower, married married another another woman, woman, i i believe, believe, became became an an adventurer, adventurer, a a gambler, gambler, and and a a cheat. cheat. what what he he is is now, now, you see. see. but but he he was was a a fine-looking fine-looking man man when when i i married married him,' him,' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with an an echo echo of of her her old old pride pride and and admiration admiration in in her her tone; tone; 'and 'and i i believed believed him him -- -- i i was was a a fool! fool! -- -- to to be be the the soul soul of of honour!' honour!' she she gave gave my my hand hand a a squeeze, squeeze, and and shook shook her her head. head. 'he 'he is is nothing nothing to to me me now, now, trot trot -- -- less less than than nothing. nothing. but, but, sooner sooner than than have have him him punished punished for for his his offences offences (as (as he he would would be be if if he he prowled prowled about about in in this this country), country), i i give give him him more more money money than than i i can can afford, afford, at at intervals intervals when when he he reappears, reappears, to to go go away. away. i i was was a a fool fool when when i i married married him; him; and and i i am am so so far far an an incurable incurable fool fool on on that that subject, subject, that, that, for for the the sake sake of of what what i i once once believed believed him him to to be, be, i i wouldn't wouldn't have have even even this this shadow shadow of of my my idle idle fancy fancy hardly hardly dealt dealt with. with. for for i i was was in in earnest, earnest, trot, trot, if if ever ever a a woman woman was.' was.' my my aunt aunt dismissed dismissed the the matter matter with with a a heavy heavy sigh, sigh, and and smoothed smoothed her her dress. dress. 'there, 'there, my my dear!' dear!' she she said. said. 'now 'now you know know the the beginning, beginning, middle, middle, and and end, end, and and all all about about it. it. we we won't won't mention mention the the subject subject to to one one another another any any more; more; neither, neither, of of course, course, will will you mention mention it it to to anybody anybody else. else. this this is is my my grumpy, grumpy, frumpy frumpy story, story, and and we'll we'll keep keep it it to to ourselves, ourselves, trot!' trot!' chapter chapter 48. 48. domestic domestic i i laboured laboured hard hard at at my my book, book, without without allowing allowing it it to to interfere interfere with with the the punctual punctual discharge discharge of of my my newspaper newspaper duties; duties; and and it it came came out out and and was was very very successful. successful. i i was was not not stunned stunned by by the the praise praise which which sounded sounded in in my my ears, ears, notwithstanding notwithstanding that that i i was was keenly keenly alive alive to to it, it, and and thought thought better better of of my my own own performance, performance, i i have have little little doubt, doubt, than than anybody anybody else else did. did. it it has has always always been been in in my my observation observation of of human human nature, nature, that that a a man man who who has has any any good good reason reason to to believe believe in in himself himself never never flourishes flourishes himself himself before before the the faces faces of of other other people people in in order order that that they they may may believe believe in in him. him. for for this this reason, reason, i i retained retained my my modesty modesty in in very very self-respect; self-respect; and and the the more more praise praise i i got, got, the the more more i i tried tried to to deserve. deserve. it it is is not not my my purpose, purpose, in in this this record, record, though though in in all all other other essentials essentials it it is is my my written written memory, memory, to to pursue pursue the the history history of of my my own own fictions. fictions. they they express express themselves, themselves, and and i i leave leave them them to to themselves. themselves. when when i i refer refer to to them, them, incidentally, incidentally, it it is is only only as as a a part part of of my my progress. progress. having having some some foundation foundation for for believing, believing, by by this this time, time, that that nature nature and and accident accident had had made made me me an an author, author, i i pursued pursued my my vocation vocation with with confidence. confidence. without without such such assurance assurance i i should should certainly certainly have have left left it it alone, alone, and and bestowed bestowed my my energy energy on on some some other other endeavour. endeavour. i i should should have have tried tried to to find find out out what what nature nature and and accident accident really really had had made made me, me, and and to to be be that, that, and and nothing nothing else. else. i i had had been been writing, writing, in in the the newspaper newspaper and and elsewhere, elsewhere, so so prosperously, prosperously, that that when when my my new new success success was was achieved, achieved, i i considered considered myself myself reasonably reasonably entitled entitled to to escape escape from from the the dreary dreary debates. debates. one one joyful joyful night, night, therefore, therefore, i i noted noted down down the the music music of of the the parliamentary parliamentary bagpipes bagpipes for for the the last last time, time, and and i i have have never never heard heard it it since; since; though though i i still still recognize recognize the the old old drone drone in in the the newspapers, newspapers, without without any any substantial substantial variation variation (except, (except, perhaps, perhaps, that that there there is is more more of of it), it), all all the the livelong livelong session. session. i i now now write write of of the the time time when when i i had had been been married, married, i i suppose, suppose, about about a a year year and and a a half. half. after after several several varieties varieties of of experiment, experiment, we we had had given given up up the the housekeeping housekeeping as as a a bad bad job. job. the the house house kept kept itself, itself, and and we we kept kept a a page. page. the the principal principal function function of of this this retainer retainer was was to to quarrel quarrel with with the the cook; cook; in in which which respect respect he he was was a a perfect perfect whittington, whittington, without without his his cat, cat, or or the the remotest remotest chance chance of of being being made made lord lord mayor. mayor. he he appears appears to to me me to to have have lived lived in in a a hail hail of of saucepan-lids. saucepan-lids. his his whole whole existence existence was was a a scuffle. scuffle. he he would would shriek shriek for for help help on on the the most most improper improper occasions, occasions, -- -- as as when when we we had had a a little little dinner-party, dinner-party, or or a a few few friends friends in in the the evening, evening, -- -- and and would would come come tumbling tumbling out out of of the the kitchen, kitchen, with with iron iron missiles missiles flying flying after after him. him. we we wanted wanted to to get get rid rid of of him, him, but but he he was was very very much much attached attached to to us, us, and and wouldn't wouldn't go. go. he he was was a a tearful tearful boy, boy, and and broke broke into into such such deplorable deplorable lamentations, lamentations, when when a a cessation cessation of of our our connexion connexion was was hinted hinted at, at, that that we we were were obliged obliged to to keep keep him. him. he he had had no no mother mother -- -- no no anything anything in in the the way way of of a a relative, relative, that that i i could could discover, discover, except except a a sister, sister, who who fled fled to to america america the the moment moment we we had had taken taken him him off off her her hands; hands; and and he he became became quartered quartered on on us us like like a a horrible horrible young young changeling. changeling. he he had had a a lively lively perception perception of of his his own own unfortunate unfortunate state, state, and and was was always always rubbing rubbing his his eyes eyes with with the the sleeve sleeve of of his his jacket, jacket, or or stooping stooping to to blow blow his his nose nose on on the the extreme extreme corner corner of of a a little little pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, which which he he never never would would take take completely completely out out of of his his pocket, pocket, but but always always economized economized and and secreted. secreted. this this unlucky unlucky page, page, engaged engaged in in an an evil evil hour hour at at six six pounds pounds ten ten per per annum, annum, was was a a source source of of continual continual trouble trouble to to me. me. i i watched watched him him as as he he grew grew -- -- and and he he grew grew like like scarlet scarlet beans beans -- -- with with painful painful apprehensions apprehensions of of the the time time when when he he would would begin begin to to shave; shave; even even of of the the days days when when he he would would be be bald bald or or grey. grey. i i saw saw no no prospect prospect of of ever ever getting getting rid rid of of him; him; and, and, projecting projecting myself myself into into the the future, future, used used to to think think what what an an inconvenience inconvenience he he would would be be when when he he was was an an old old man. man. i i never never expected expected anything anything less, less, than than this this unfortunate's unfortunate's manner manner of of getting getting me me out out of of my my difficulty. difficulty. he he stole stole dora's dora's watch, watch, which, which, like like everything everything else else belonging belonging to to us, us, had had no no particular particular place place of of its its own; own; and, and, converting converting it it into into money, money, spent spent the the produce produce (he (he was was always always a a weak-minded weak-minded boy) boy) in in incessantly incessantly riding riding up up and and down down between between london london and and uxbridge uxbridge outside outside the the coach. coach. he he was was taken taken to to bow bow street, street, as as well well as as i i remember, remember, on on the the completion completion of of his his fifteenth fifteenth journey; journey; when when four-and-sixpence, four-and-sixpence, and and a a second-hand second-hand fife fife which which he he couldn't couldn't play, play, were were found found upon upon his his person. person. the the surprise surprise and and its its consequences consequences would would have have been been much much less less disagreeable disagreeable to to me me if if he he had had not not been been penitent. penitent. but but he he was was very very penitent penitent indeed, indeed, and and in in a a peculiar peculiar way way -- -- not not in in the the lump, lump, but but by by instalments. instalments. for for example: example: the the day day after after that that on on which which i i was was obliged obliged to to appear appear against against him, him, he he made made certain certain revelations revelations touching touching a a hamper hamper in in the the cellar, cellar, which which we we believed believed to to be be full full of of wine, wine, but but which which had had nothing nothing in in it it except except bottles bottles and and corks. corks. we we supposed supposed he he had had now now eased eased his his mind, mind, and and told told the the worst worst he he knew knew of of the the cook; cook; but, but, a a day day or or two two afterwards, afterwards, his his conscience conscience sustained sustained a a new new twinge, twinge, and and he he disclosed disclosed how how she she had had a a little little girl, girl, who, who, early early every every morning, morning, took took away away our our bread; bread; and and also also how how he he himself himself had had been been suborned suborned to to maintain maintain the the milkman milkman in in coals. coals. in in two two or or three three days days more, more, i i was was informed informed by by the the authorities authorities of of his his having having led led to to the the discovery discovery of of sirloins sirloins of of beef beef among among the the kitchen-stuff, kitchen-stuff, and and sheets sheets in in the the rag-bag. rag-bag. a a little little while while afterwards, afterwards, he he broke broke out out in in an an entirely entirely new new direction, direction, and and confessed confessed to to a a knowledge knowledge of of burglarious burglarious intentions intentions as as to to our our premises, premises, on on the the part part of of the the pot-boy, pot-boy, who who was was immediately immediately taken taken up. up. i i got got to to be be so so ashamed ashamed of of being being such such a a victim, victim, that that i i would would have have given given him him any any money money to to hold hold his his tongue, tongue, or or would would have have offered offered a a round round bribe bribe for for his his being being permitted permitted to to run run away. away. it it was was an an aggravating aggravating circumstance circumstance in in the the case case that that he he had had no no idea idea of of this, this, but but conceived conceived that that he he was was making making me me amends amends in in every every new new discovery: discovery: not not to to say, say, heaping heaping obligations obligations on on my my head. head. at at last last i i ran ran away away myself, myself, whenever whenever i i saw saw an an emissary emissary of of the the police police approaching approaching with with some some new new intelligence; intelligence; and and lived lived a a stealthy stealthy life life until until he he was was tried tried and and ordered ordered to to be be transported. transported. even even then then he he couldn't couldn't be be quiet, quiet, but but was was always always writing writing us us letters; letters; and and wanted wanted so so much much to to see see dora dora before before he he went went away, away, that that dora dora went went to to visit visit him, him, and and fainted fainted when when she she found found herself herself inside inside the the iron iron bars. bars. in in short, short, i i had had no no peace peace of of my my life life until until he he was was expatriated, expatriated, and and made made (as (as i i afterwards afterwards heard) heard) a a shepherd shepherd of, of, 'up 'up the the country' country' somewhere; somewhere; i i have have no no geographical geographical idea idea where. where. all all this this led led me me into into some some serious serious reflections, reflections, and and presented presented our our mistakes mistakes in in a a new new aspect; aspect; as as i i could could not not help help communicating communicating to to dora dora one one evening, evening, in in spite spite of of my my tenderness tenderness for for her. her. 'my 'my love,' love,' said said i, i, 'it 'it is is very very painful painful to to me me to to think think that that our our want want of of system system and and management, management, involves involves not not only only ourselves ourselves (which (which we we have have got got used used to), to), but but other other people.' people.' 'you have have been been silent silent for for a a long long time, time, and and now now you are are going going to to be be cross!' cross!' said said dora. dora. 'no, 'no, my my dear, dear, indeed! indeed! let let me me explain explain to to you what what i i mean.' mean.' 'i 'i think think i i don't don't want want to to know,' know,' said said dora. dora. 'but 'but i i want want you to to know, know, my my love. love. put put jip jip down.' down.' dora dora put put his his nose nose to to mine, mine, and and said said 'boh!' 'boh!' to to drive drive my my seriousness seriousness away; away; but, but, not not succeeding, succeeding, ordered ordered him him into into his his pagoda, pagoda, and and sat sat looking looking at at me, me, with with her her hands hands folded, folded, and and a a most most resigned resigned little little expression expression of of countenance. countenance. 'the 'the fact fact is, is, my my dear,' dear,' i i began, began, 'there 'there is is contagion contagion in in us. us. we we infect infect everyone everyone about about us.' us.' i i might might have have gone gone on on in in this this figurative figurative manner, manner, if if dora's dora's face face had had not not admonished admonished me me that that she she was was wondering wondering with with all all her her might might whether whether i i was was going going to to propose propose any any new new kind kind of of vaccination, vaccination, or or other other medical medical remedy, remedy, for for this this unwholesome unwholesome state state of of ours. ours. therefore therefore i i checked checked myself, myself, and and made made my my meaning meaning plainer. plainer. 'it 'it is is not not merely, merely, my my pet,' pet,' said said i, i, 'that 'that we we lose lose money money and and comfort, comfort, and and even even temper temper sometimes, sometimes, by by not not learning learning to to be be more more careful; careful; but but that that we we incur incur the the serious serious responsibility responsibility of of spoiling spoiling everyone everyone who who comes comes into into our our service, service, or or has has any any dealings dealings with with us. us. i i begin begin to to be be afraid afraid that that the the fault fault is is not not entirely entirely on on one one side, side, but but that that these these people people all all turn turn out out ill ill because because we we don't don't turn turn out out very very well well ourselves.' ourselves.' 'oh, 'oh, what what an an accusation,' accusation,' exclaimed exclaimed dora, dora, opening opening her her eyes eyes wide; wide; 'to 'to say say that that you ever ever saw saw me me take take gold gold watches! watches! oh!' oh!' 'my 'my dearest,' dearest,' i i remonstrated, remonstrated, 'don't 'don't talk talk preposterous preposterous nonsense! nonsense! who who has has made made the the least least allusion allusion to to gold gold watches?' watches?' 'you did,' did,' returned returned dora. dora. 'you know know you did. did. you said said i i hadn't hadn't turned turned out out well, well, and and compared compared me me to to him.' him.' 'to 'to whom?' whom?' i i asked. asked. 'to 'to the the page,' page,' sobbed sobbed dora. dora. 'oh, 'oh, you cruel cruel fellow, fellow, to to compare compare your your affectionate affectionate wife wife to to a a transported transported page! page! why why didn't didn't you tell tell me me your your opinion opinion of of me me before before we we were were married? married? why why didn't didn't you say, say, you hard-hearted hard-hearted thing, thing, that that you were were convinced convinced i i was was worse worse than than a a transported transported page? page? oh, oh, what what a a dreadful dreadful opinion opinion to to have have of of me! me! oh, oh, my my goodness!' goodness!' 'now, 'now, dora, dora, my my love,' love,' i i returned, returned, gently gently trying trying to to remove remove the the handkerchief handkerchief she she pressed pressed to to her her eyes, eyes, 'this 'this is is not not only only very very ridiculous ridiculous of of you, but but very very wrong. wrong. in in the the first first place, place, it's it's not not true.' true.' 'you always always said said he he was was a a story-teller,' story-teller,' sobbed sobbed dora. dora. 'and 'and now now you say say the the same same of of me! me! oh, oh, what what shall shall i i do! do! what what shall shall i i do!' do!' 'my 'my darling darling girl,' girl,' i i retorted, retorted, 'i 'i really really must must entreat entreat you to to be be reasonable, reasonable, and and listen listen to to what what i i did did say, say, and and do do say. say. my my dear dear dora, dora, unless unless we we learn learn to to do do our our duty duty to to those those whom whom we we employ, employ, they they will will never never learn learn to to do do their their duty duty to to us. us. i i am am afraid afraid we we present present opportunities opportunities to to people people to to do do wrong, wrong, that that never never ought ought to to be be presented. presented. even even if if we we were were as as lax lax as as we we are, are, in in all all our our arrangements, arrangements, by by choice choice -- -- which which we we are are not not -- -- even even if if we we liked liked it, it, and and found found it it agreeable agreeable to to be be so so -- -- which which we we don't don't -- -- i i am am persuaded persuaded we we should should have have no no right right to to go go on on in in this this way. way. we we are are positively positively corrupting corrupting people. people. we we are are bound bound to to think think of of that. that. i i can't can't help help thinking thinking of of it, it, dora. dora. it it is is a a reflection reflection i i am am unable unable to to dismiss, dismiss, and and it it sometimes sometimes makes makes me me very very uneasy. uneasy. there, there, dear, dear, that's that's all. all. come come now. now. don't don't be be foolish!' foolish!' dora dora would would not not allow allow me, me, for for a a long long time, time, to to remove remove the the handkerchief. handkerchief. she she sat sat sobbing sobbing and and murmuring murmuring behind behind it, it, that, that, if if i i was was uneasy, uneasy, why why had had i i ever ever been been married? married? why why hadn't hadn't i i said, said, even even the the day day before before we we went went to to church, church, that that i i knew knew i i should should be be uneasy, uneasy, and and i i would would rather rather not? not? if if i i couldn't couldn't bear bear her, her, why why didn't didn't i i send send her her away away to to her her aunts aunts at at putney, putney, or or to to julia julia mills mills in in india? india? julia julia would would be be glad glad to to see see her, her, and and would would not not call call her her a a transported transported page; page; julia julia never never had had called called her her anything anything of of the the sort. sort. in in short, short, dora dora was was so so afflicted, afflicted, and and so so afflicted afflicted me me by by being being in in that that condition, condition, that that i i felt felt it it was was of of no no use use repeating repeating this this kind kind of of effort, effort, though though never never so so mildly, mildly, and and i i must must take take some some other other course. course. what what other other course course was was left left to to take? take? to to 'form 'form her her mind'? mind'? this this was was a a common common phrase phrase of of words words which which had had a a fair fair and and promising promising sound, sound, and and i i resolved resolved to to form form dora's dora's mind. mind. i i began began immediately. immediately. when when dora dora was was very very childish, childish, and and i i would would have have infinitely infinitely preferred preferred to to humour humour her, her, i i tried tried to to be be grave grave -- -- and and disconcerted disconcerted her, her, and and myself myself too. too. i i talked talked to to her her on on the the subjects subjects which which occupied occupied my my thoughts; thoughts; and and i i read read shakespeare shakespeare to to her her -- -- and and fatigued fatigued her her to to the the last last degree. degree. i i accustomed accustomed myself myself to to giving giving her, her, as as it it were were quite quite casually, casually, little little scraps scraps of of useful useful information, information, or or sound sound opinion opinion -- -- and and she she started started from from them them when when i i let let them them off, off, as as if if they they had had been been crackers. crackers. no no matter matter how how incidentally incidentally or or naturally naturally i i endeavoured endeavoured to to form form my my little little wife's wife's mind, mind, i i could could not not help help seeing seeing that that she she always always had had an an instinctive instinctive perception perception of of what what i i was was about, about, and and became became a a prey prey to to the the keenest keenest apprehensions. apprehensions. in in particular, particular, it it was was clear clear to to me, me, that that she she thought thought shakespeare shakespeare a a terrible terrible fellow. fellow. the the formation formation went went on on very very slowly. slowly. i i pressed pressed traddles traddles into into the the service service without without his his knowledge; knowledge; and and whenever whenever he he came came to to see see us, us, exploded exploded my my mines mines upon upon him him for for the the edification edification of of dora dora at at second second hand. hand. the the amount amount of of practical practical wisdom wisdom i i bestowed bestowed upon upon traddles traddles in in this this manner manner was was immense, immense, and and of of the the best best quality; quality; but but it it had had no no other other effect effect upon upon dora dora than than to to depress depress her her spirits, spirits, and and make make her her always always nervous nervous with with the the dread dread that that it it would would be be her her turn turn next. next. i i found found myself myself in in the the condition condition of of a a schoolmaster, schoolmaster, a a trap, trap, a a pitfall; pitfall; of of always always playing playing spider spider to to dora's dora's fly, fly, and and always always pouncing pouncing out out of of my my hole hole to to her her infinite infinite disturbance. disturbance. still, still, looking looking forward forward through through this this intermediate intermediate stage, stage, to to the the time time when when there there should should be be a a perfect perfect sympathy sympathy between between dora dora and and me, me, and and when when i i should should have have 'formed 'formed her her mind' mind' to to my my entire entire satisfaction, satisfaction, i i persevered, persevered, even even for for months. months. finding finding at at last, last, however, however, that, that, although although i i had had been been all all this this time time a a very very porcupine porcupine or or hedgehog, hedgehog, bristling bristling all all over over with with determination, determination, i i had had effected effected nothing, nothing, it it began began to to occur occur to to me me that that perhaps perhaps dora's dora's mind mind was was already already formed. formed. on on further further consideration consideration this this appeared appeared so so likely, likely, that that i i abandoned abandoned my my scheme, scheme, which which had had had had a a more more promising promising appearance appearance in in words words than than in in action; action; resolving resolving henceforth henceforth to to be be satisfied satisfied with with my my child-wife, child-wife, and and to to try try to to change change her her into into nothing nothing else else by by any any process. process. i i was was heartily heartily tired tired of of being being sagacious sagacious and and prudent prudent by by myself, myself, and and of of seeing seeing my my darling darling under under restraint; restraint; so so i i bought bought a a pretty pretty pair pair of of ear-rings ear-rings for for her, her, and and a a collar collar for for jip, jip, and and went went home home one one day day to to make make myself myself agreeable. agreeable. dora dora was was delighted delighted with with the the little little presents, presents, and and kissed kissed me me joyfully; joyfully; but but there there was was a a shadow shadow between between us, us, however however slight, slight, and and i i had had made made up up my my mind mind that that it it should should not not be be there. there. if if there there must must be be such such a a shadow shadow anywhere, anywhere, i i would would keep keep it it for for the the future future in in my my own own breast. breast. i i sat sat down down by by my my wife wife on on the the sofa, sofa, and and put put the the ear-rings ear-rings in in her her ears; ears; and and then then i i told told her her that that i i feared feared we we had had not not been been quite quite as as good good company company lately, lately, as as we we used used to to be, be, and and that that the the fault fault was was mine. mine. which which i i sincerely sincerely felt, felt, and and which which indeed indeed it it was. was. 'the 'the truth truth is, is, dora, dora, my my life,' life,' i i said; said; 'i 'i have have been been trying trying to to be be wise.' wise.' 'and 'and to to make make me me wise wise too,' too,' said said dora, dora, timidly. timidly. 'haven't 'haven't you, doady?' doady?' i i nodded nodded assent assent to to the the pretty pretty inquiry inquiry of of the the raised raised eyebrows, eyebrows, and and kissed kissed the the parted parted lips. lips. 'it's 'it's of of not not a a bit bit of of use,' use,' said said dora, dora, shaking shaking her her head, head, until until the the ear-rings ear-rings rang rang again. again. 'you know know what what a a little little thing thing i i am, am, and and what what i i wanted wanted you to to call call me me from from the the first. first. if if you can't can't do do so, so, i i am am afraid afraid you'll you'll never never like like me. me. are are you sure sure you don't don't think, think, sometimes, sometimes, it it would would have have been been better better to to have have -- -- ' ' 'done 'done what, what, my my dear?' dear?' for for she she made made no no effort effort to to proceed. proceed. 'nothing!' 'nothing!' said said dora. dora. 'nothing?' 'nothing?' i i repeated. repeated. she she put put her her arms arms round round my my neck, neck, and and laughed, laughed, and and called called herself herself by by her her favourite favourite name name of of a a goose, goose, and and hid hid her her face face on on my my shoulder shoulder in in such such a a profusion profusion of of curls curls that that it it was was quite quite a a task task to to clear clear them them away away and and see see it. it. 'don't 'don't i i think think it it would would have have been been better better to to have have done done nothing, nothing, than than to to have have tried tried to to form form my my little little wife's wife's mind?' mind?' said said i, i, laughing laughing at at myself. myself. 'is 'is that that the the question? question? yes, yes, indeed, indeed, i i do.' do.' 'is 'is that that what what you have have been been trying?' trying?' cried cried dora. dora. 'oh 'oh what what a a shocking shocking boy!' boy!' 'but 'but i i shall shall never never try try any any more,' more,' said said i. i. 'for 'for i i love love her her dearly dearly as as she she is.' is.' 'without 'without a a story story -- -- really?' really?' inquired inquired dora, dora, creeping creeping closer closer to to me. me. 'why 'why should should i i seek seek to to change,' change,' said said i, i, 'what 'what has has been been so so precious precious to to me me for for so so long! long! you never never can can show show better better than than as as your your own own natural natural self, self, my my sweet sweet dora; dora; and and we'll we'll try try no no conceited conceited experiments, experiments, but but go go back back to to our our old old way, way, and and be be happy.' happy.' 'and 'and be be happy!' happy!' returned returned dora. dora. 'yes! 'yes! all all day! day! and and you won't won't mind mind things things going going a a tiny tiny morsel morsel wrong, wrong, sometimes?' sometimes?' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said i. i. 'we 'we must must do do the the best best we we can.' can.' 'and 'and you won't won't tell tell me, me, any any more, more, that that we we make make other other people people bad,' bad,' coaxed coaxed dora; dora; 'will 'will you? because because you know know it's it's so so dreadfully dreadfully cross!' cross!' 'no, 'no, no,' no,' said said i. i. 'it's 'it's better better for for me me to to be be stupid stupid than than uncomfortable, uncomfortable, isn't isn't it?' it?' said said dora. dora. 'better 'better to to be be naturally naturally dora dora than than anything anything else else in in the the world.' world.' 'in 'in the the world! world! ah, ah, doady, doady, it's it's a a large large place!' place!' she she shook shook her her head, head, turned turned her her delighted delighted bright bright eyes eyes up up to to mine, mine, kissed kissed me, me, broke broke into into a a merry merry laugh, laugh, and and sprang sprang away away to to put put on on jip's jip's new new collar. collar. so so ended ended my my last last attempt attempt to to make make any any change change in in dora. dora. i i had had been been unhappy unhappy in in trying trying it; it; i i could could not not endure endure my my own own solitary solitary wisdom; wisdom; i i could could not not reconcile reconcile it it with with her her former former appeal appeal to to me me as as my my child-wife. child-wife. i i resolved resolved to to do do what what i i could, could, in in a a quiet quiet way, way, to to improve improve our our proceedings proceedings myself, myself, but but i i foresaw foresaw that that my my utmost utmost would would be be very very little, little, or or i i must must degenerate degenerate into into the the spider spider again, again, and and be be for for ever ever lying lying in in wait. wait. and and the the shadow shadow i i have have mentioned, mentioned, that that was was not not to to be be between between us us any any more, more, but but was was to to rest rest wholly wholly on on my my own own heart? heart? how how did did that that fall? fall? the the old old unhappy unhappy feeling feeling pervaded pervaded my my life. life. it it was was deepened, deepened, if if it it were were changed changed at at all; all; but but it it was was as as undefined undefined as as ever, ever, and and addressed addressed me me like like a a strain strain of of sorrowful sorrowful music music faintly faintly heard heard in in the the night. night. i i loved loved my my wife wife dearly, dearly, and and i i was was happy; happy; but but the the happiness happiness i i had had vaguely vaguely anticipated, anticipated, once, once, was was not not the the happiness happiness i i enjoyed, enjoyed, and and there there was was always always something something wanting. wanting. in in fulfilment fulfilment of of the the compact compact i i have have made made with with myself, myself, to to reflect reflect my my mind mind on on this this paper, paper, i i again again examine examine it, it, closely, closely, and and bring bring its its secrets secrets to to the the light. light. what what i i missed, missed, i i still still regarded regarded -- -- i i always always regarded regarded -- -- as as something something that that had had been been a a dream dream of of my my youthful youthful fancy; fancy; that that was was incapable incapable of of realization; realization; that that i i was was now now discovering discovering to to be be so, so, with with some some natural natural pain, pain, as as all all men men did. did. but but that that it it would would have have been been better better for for me me if if my my wife wife could could have have helped helped me me more, more, and and shared shared the the many many thoughts thoughts in in which which i i had had no no partner; partner; and and that that this this might might have have been; been; i i knew. knew. between between these these two two irreconcilable irreconcilable conclusions: conclusions: the the one, one, that that what what i i felt felt was was general general and and unavoidable; unavoidable; the the other, other, that that it it was was particular particular to to me, me, and and might might have have been been different: different: i i balanced balanced curiously, curiously, with with no no distinct distinct sense sense of of their their opposition opposition to to each each other. other. when when i i thought thought of of the the airy airy dreams dreams of of youth youth that that are are incapable incapable of of realization, realization, i i thought thought of of the the better better state state preceding preceding manhood manhood that that i i had had outgrown; outgrown; and and then then the the contented contented days days with with agnes, agnes, in in the the dear dear old old house, house, arose arose before before me, me, like like spectres spectres of of the the dead, dead, that that might might have have some some renewal renewal in in another another world, world, but but never never more more could could be be reanimated reanimated here. here. sometimes, sometimes, the the speculation speculation came came into into my my thoughts, thoughts, what what might might have have happened, happened, or or what what would would have have happened, happened, if if dora dora and and i i had had never never known known each each other? other? but but she she was was so so incorporated incorporated with with my my existence, existence, that that it it was was the the idlest idlest of of all all fancies, fancies, and and would would soon soon rise rise out out of of my my reach reach and and sight, sight, like like gossamer gossamer floating floating in in the the air. air. i i always always loved loved her. her. what what i i am am describing, describing, slumbered, slumbered, and and half half awoke, awoke, and and slept slept again, again, in in the the innermost innermost recesses recesses of of my my mind. mind. there there was was no no evidence evidence of of it it in in me; me; i i know know of of no no influence influence it it had had in in anything anything i i said said or or did. did. i i bore bore the the weight weight of of all all our our little little cares, cares, and and all all my my projects; projects; dora dora held held the the pens; pens; and and we we both both felt felt that that our our shares shares were were adjusted adjusted as as the the case case required. required. she she was was truly truly fond fond of of me, me, and and proud proud of of me; me; and and when when agnes agnes wrote wrote a a few few earnest earnest words words in in her her letters letters to to dora, dora, of of the the pride pride and and interest interest with with which which my my old old friends friends heard heard of of my my growing growing reputation, reputation, and and read read my my book book as as if if they they heard heard me me speaking speaking its its contents, contents, dora dora read read them them out out to to me me with with tears tears of of joy joy in in her her bright bright eyes, eyes, and and said said i i was was a a dear dear old old clever, clever, famous famous boy. boy. 'the 'the first first mistaken mistaken impulse impulse of of an an undisciplined undisciplined heart.' heart.' those those words words of of mrs. mrs. strong's strong's were were constantly constantly recurring recurring to to me, me, at at this this time; time; were were almost almost always always present present to to my my mind. mind. i i awoke awoke with with them, them, often, often, in in the the night; night; i i remember remember to to have have even even read read them, them, in in dreams, dreams, inscribed inscribed upon upon the the walls walls of of houses. houses. for for i i knew, knew, now, now, that that my my own own heart heart was was undisciplined undisciplined when when it it first first loved loved dora; dora; and and that that if if it it had had been been disciplined, disciplined, it it never never could could have have felt, felt, when when we we were were married, married, what what it it had had felt felt in in its its secret secret experience. experience. 'there 'there can can be be no no disparity disparity in in marriage, marriage, like like unsuitability unsuitability of of mind mind and and purpose.' purpose.' those those words words i i remembered remembered too. too. i i had had endeavoured endeavoured to to adapt adapt dora dora to to myself, myself, and and found found it it impracticable. impracticable. it it remained remained for for me me to to adapt adapt myself myself to to dora; dora; to to share share with with her her what what i i could, could, and and be be happy; happy; to to bear bear on on my my own own shoulders shoulders what what i i must, must, and and be be happy happy still. still. this this was was the the discipline discipline to to which which i i tried tried to to bring bring my my heart, heart, when when i i began began to to think. think. it it made made my my second second year year much much happier happier than than my my first; first; and, and, what what was was better better still, still, made made dora's dora's life life all all sunshine. sunshine. but, but, as as that that year year wore wore on, on, dora dora was was not not strong. strong. i i had had hoped hoped that that lighter lighter hands hands than than mine mine would would help help to to mould mould her her character, character, and and that that a a baby-smile baby-smile upon upon her her breast breast might might change change my my child-wife child-wife to to a a woman. woman. it it was was not not to to be. be. the the spirit spirit fluttered fluttered for for a a moment moment on on the the threshold threshold of of its its little little prison, prison, and, and, unconscious unconscious of of captivity, captivity, took took wing. wing. 'when 'when i i can can run run about about again, again, as as i i used used to to do, do, aunt,' aunt,' said said dora, dora, 'i 'i shall shall make make jip jip race. race. he he is is getting getting quite quite slow slow and and lazy.' lazy.' 'i 'i suspect, suspect, my my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt aunt quietly quietly working working by by her her side, side, 'he 'he has has a a worse worse disorder disorder than than that. that. age, age, dora.' dora.' 'do 'do you think think he he is is old?' old?' said said dora, dora, astonished. astonished. 'oh, 'oh, how how strange strange it it seems seems that that jip jip should should be be old!' old!' 'it's 'it's a a complaint complaint we we are are all all liable liable to, to, little little one, one, as as we we get get on on in in life,' life,' said said my my aunt, aunt, cheerfully; cheerfully; 'i 'i don't don't feel feel more more free free from from it it than than i i used used to to be, be, i i assure assure you.' 'but 'but jip,' jip,' said said dora, dora, looking looking at at him him with with compassion, compassion, 'even 'even little little jip! jip! oh, oh, poor poor fellow!' fellow!' 'i 'i dare dare say say he'll he'll last last a a long long time time yet, yet, blossom,' blossom,' said said my my aunt, aunt, patting patting dora dora on on the the cheek, cheek, as as she she leaned leaned out out of of her her couch couch to to look look at at jip, jip, who who responded responded by by standing standing on on his his hind hind legs, legs, and and baulking baulking himself himself in in various various asthmatic asthmatic attempts attempts to to scramble scramble up up by by the the head head and and shoulders. shoulders. 'he 'he must must have have a a piece piece of of flannel flannel in in his his house house this this winter, winter, and and i i shouldn't shouldn't wonder wonder if if he he came came out out quite quite fresh fresh again, again, with with the the flowers flowers in in the the spring. spring. bless bless the the little little dog!' dog!' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt, aunt, 'if 'if he he had had as as many many lives lives as as a a cat, cat, and and was was on on the the point point of of losing losing 'em 'em all, all, he'd he'd bark bark at at me me with with his his last last breath, breath, i i believe!' believe!' dora dora had had helped helped him him up up on on the the sofa; sofa; where where he he really really was was defying defying my my aunt aunt to to such such a a furious furious extent, extent, that that he he couldn't couldn't keep keep straight, straight, but but barked barked himself himself sideways. sideways. the the more more my my aunt aunt looked looked at at him, him, the the more more he he reproached reproached her; her; for for she she had had lately lately taken taken to to spectacles, spectacles, and and for for some some inscrutable inscrutable reason reason he he considered considered the the glasses glasses personal. personal. dora dora made made him him lie lie down down by by her, her, with with a a good good deal deal of of persuasion; persuasion; and and when when he he was was quiet, quiet, drew drew one one of of his his long long ears ears through through and and through through her her hand, hand, repeating repeating thoughtfully, thoughtfully, 'even 'even little little jip! jip! oh, oh, poor poor fellow!' fellow!' 'his 'his lungs lungs are are good good enough,' enough,' said said my my aunt, aunt, gaily, gaily, 'and 'and his his dislikes dislikes are are not not at at all all feeble. feeble. he he has has a a good good many many years years before before him, him, no no doubt. doubt. but but if if you want want a a dog dog to to race race with, with, little little blossom, blossom, he he has has lived lived too too well well for for that, that, and and i'll i'll give give you one.' one.' 'thank 'thank you, aunt,' aunt,' said said dora, dora, faintly. faintly. 'but 'but don't, don't, please!' please!' 'no?' 'no?' said said my my aunt, aunt, taking taking off off her her spectacles. spectacles. 'i 'i couldn't couldn't have have any any other other dog dog but but jip,' jip,' said said dora. dora. 'it 'it would would be be so so unkind unkind to to jip! jip! besides, besides, i i couldn't couldn't be be such such friends friends with with any any other other dog dog but but jip; jip; because because he he wouldn't wouldn't have have known known me me before before i i was was married, married, and and wouldn't wouldn't have have barked barked at at doady doady when when he he first first came came to to our our house. house. i i couldn't couldn't care care for for any any other other dog dog but but jip, jip, i i am am afraid, afraid, aunt.' aunt.' 'to 'to be be sure!' sure!' said said my my aunt, aunt, patting patting her her cheek cheek again. again. 'you are are right.' right.' 'you are are not not offended,' offended,' said said dora. dora. 'are 'are you?' 'why, 'why, what what a a sensitive sensitive pet pet it it is!' is!' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, bending bending over over her her affectionately. affectionately. 'to 'to think think that that i i could could be be offended!' offended!' 'no, 'no, no, no, i i didn't didn't really really think think so,' so,' returned returned dora; dora; 'but 'but i i am am a a little little tired, tired, and and it it made made me me silly silly for for a a moment moment -- -- i i am am always always a a silly silly little little thing, thing, you know, know, but but it it made made me me more more silly silly -- -- to to talk talk about about jip. jip. he he has has known known me me in in all all that that has has happened happened to to me, me, haven't haven't you, jip? jip? and and i i couldn't couldn't bear bear to to slight slight him, him, because because he he was was a a little little altered altered -- -- could could i, i, jip?' jip?' jip jip nestled nestled closer closer to to his his mistress, mistress, and and lazily lazily licked licked her her hand. hand. 'you are are not not so so old, old, jip, jip, are are you, that that you'll you'll leave leave your your mistress mistress yet?' yet?' said said dora. dora. 'we 'we may may keep keep one one another another company company a a little little longer!' longer!' my my pretty pretty dora! dora! when when she she came came down down to to dinner dinner on on the the ensuing ensuing sunday, sunday, and and was was so so glad glad to to see see old old traddles traddles (who (who always always dined dined with with us us on on sunday), sunday), we we thought thought she she would would be be 'running 'running about about as as she she used used to to do', do', in in a a few few days. days. but but they they said, said, wait wait a a few few days days more; more; and and then, then, wait wait a a few few days days more; more; and and still still she she neither neither ran ran nor nor walked. walked. she she looked looked very very pretty, pretty, and and was was very very merry; merry; but but the the little little feet feet that that used used to to be be so so nimble nimble when when they they danced danced round round jip, jip, were were dull dull and and motionless. motionless. i i began began to to carry carry her her downstairs downstairs every every morning, morning, and and upstairs upstairs every every night. night. she she would would clasp clasp me me round round the the neck neck and and laugh, laugh, the the while, while, as as if if i i did did it it for for a a wager. wager. jip jip would would bark bark and and caper caper round round us, us, and and go go on on before, before, and and look look back back on on the the landing, landing, breathing breathing short, short, to to see see that that we we were were coming. coming. my my aunt, aunt, the the best best and and most most cheerful cheerful of of nurses, nurses, would would trudge trudge after after us, us, a a moving moving mass mass of of shawls shawls and and pillows. pillows. mr. mr. dick dick would would not not have have relinquished relinquished his his post post of of candle-bearer candle-bearer to to anyone anyone alive. alive. traddles traddles would would be be often often at at the the bottom bottom of of the the staircase, staircase, looking looking on, on, and and taking taking charge charge of of sportive sportive messages messages from from dora dora to to the the dearest dearest girl girl in in the the world. world. we we made made quite quite a a gay gay procession procession of of it, it, and and my my child-wife child-wife was was the the gayest gayest there. there. but, but, sometimes, sometimes, when when i i took took her her up, up, and and felt felt that that she she was was lighter lighter in in my my arms, arms, a a dead dead blank blank feeling feeling came came upon upon me, me, as as if if i i were were approaching approaching to to some some frozen frozen region region yet yet unseen, unseen, that that numbed numbed my my life. life. i i avoided avoided the the recognition recognition of of this this feeling feeling by by any any name, name, or or by by any any communing communing with with myself; myself; until until one one night, night, when when it it was was very very strong strong upon upon me, me, and and my my aunt aunt had had left left her her with with a a parting parting cry cry of of 'good 'good night, night, little little blossom,' blossom,' i i sat sat down down at at my my desk desk alone, alone, and and tried tried to to think, think, oh oh what what a a fatal fatal name name it it was, was, and and how how the the blossom blossom withered withered in in its its bloom bloom upon upon the the tree! tree! chapter chapter 49. 49. i i am am involved involved in in mystery mystery i i received received one one morning morning by by the the post, post, the the following following letter, letter, dated dated canterbury, canterbury, and and addressed addressed to to me me at at doctor's doctor's commons; commons; which which i i read read with with some some surprise: surprise: 'my 'my dear dear sir, sir, 'circumstances 'circumstances beyond beyond my my individual individual control control have, have, for for a a considerable considerable lapse lapse of of time, time, effected effected a a severance severance of of that that intimacy intimacy which, which, in in the the limited limited opportunities opportunities conceded conceded to to me me in in the the midst midst of of my my professional professional duties, duties, of of contemplating contemplating the the scenes scenes and and events events of of the the past, past, tinged tinged by by the the prismatic prismatic hues hues of of memory, memory, has has ever ever afforded afforded me, me, as as it it ever ever must must continue continue to to afford, afford, gratifying gratifying emotions emotions of of no no common common description. description. this this fact, fact, my my dear dear sir, sir, combined combined with with the the distinguished distinguished elevation elevation to to which which your your talents talents have have raised raised you, deters deters me me from from presuming presuming to to aspire aspire to to the the liberty liberty of of addressing addressing the the companion companion of of my my youth, youth, by by the the familiar familiar appellation appellation of of copperfield! copperfield! it it is is sufficient sufficient to to know know that that the the name name to to which which i i do do myself myself the the honour honour to to refer, refer, will will ever ever be be treasured treasured among among the the muniments muniments of of our our house house (i (i allude allude to to the the archives archives connected connected with with our our former former lodgers, lodgers, preserved preserved by by mrs. mrs. micawber), micawber), with with sentiments sentiments of of personal personal esteem esteem amounting amounting to to affection. affection. 'it 'it is is not not for for one, one, situated, situated, through through his his original original errors errors and and a a fortuitous fortuitous combination combination of of unpropitious unpropitious events, events, as as is is the the foundered foundered bark bark (if (if he he may may be be allowed allowed to to assume assume so so maritime maritime a a denomination), denomination), who who now now takes takes up up the the pen pen to to address address you -- -- it it is is not, not, i i repeat, repeat, for for one one so so circumstanced, circumstanced, to to adopt adopt the the language language of of compliment, compliment, or or of of congratulation. congratulation. that that he he leaves leaves to to abler abler and and to to purer purer hands. hands. 'if 'if your your more more important important avocations avocations should should admit admit of of your your ever ever tracing tracing these these imperfect imperfect characters characters thus thus far far -- -- which which may may be, be, or or may may not not be, be, as as circumstances circumstances arise arise -- -- you will will naturally naturally inquire inquire by by what what object object am am i i influenced, influenced, then, then, in in inditing inditing the the present present missive? missive? allow allow me me to to say say that that i i fully fully defer defer to to the the reasonable reasonable character character of of that that inquiry, inquiry, and and proceed proceed to to develop develop it; it; premising premising that that it it is is not not an an object object of of a a pecuniary pecuniary nature. nature. 'without 'without more more directly directly referring referring to to any any latent latent ability ability that that may may possibly possibly exist exist on on my my part, part, of of wielding wielding the the thunderbolt, thunderbolt, or or directing directing the the devouring devouring and and avenging avenging flame flame in in any any quarter, quarter, i i may may be be permitted permitted to to observe, observe, in in passing, passing, that that my my brightest brightest visions visions are are for for ever ever dispelled dispelled -- -- that that my my peace peace is is shattered shattered and and my my power power of of enjoyment enjoyment destroyed destroyed -- -- that that my my heart heart is is no no longer longer in in the the right right place place -- -- and and that that i i no no more more walk walk erect erect before before my my fellow fellow man. man. the the canker canker is is in in the the flower. flower. the the cup cup is is bitter bitter to to the the brim. brim. the the worm worm is is at at his his work, work, and and will will soon soon dispose dispose of of his his victim. victim. the the sooner sooner the the better. better. but but i i will will not not digress. digress. 'placed 'placed in in a a mental mental position position of of peculiar peculiar painfulness, painfulness, beyond beyond the the assuaging assuaging reach reach even even of of mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's influence, influence, though though exercised exercised in in the the tripartite tripartite character character of of woman, woman, wife, wife, and and mother, mother, it it is is my my intention intention to to fly fly from from myself myself for for a a short short period, period, and and devote devote a a respite respite of of eight-and-forty eight-and-forty hours hours to to revisiting revisiting some some metropolitan metropolitan scenes scenes of of past past enjoyment. enjoyment. among among other other havens havens of of domestic domestic tranquillity tranquillity and and peace peace of of mind, mind, my my feet feet will will naturally naturally tend tend towards towards the the king's king's bench bench prison. prison. in in stating stating that that i i shall shall be be (d. (d. v.) v.) on on the the outside outside of of the the south south wall wall of of that that place place of of incarceration incarceration on on civil civil process, process, the the day day after after tomorrow, tomorrow, at at seven seven in in the the evening, evening, precisely, precisely, my my object object in in this this epistolary epistolary communication communication is is accomplished. accomplished. 'i 'i do do not not feel feel warranted warranted in in soliciting soliciting my my former former friend friend mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, or or my my former former friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles of of the the inner inner temple, temple, if if that that gentleman gentleman is is still still existent existent and and forthcoming, forthcoming, to to condescend condescend to to meet meet me, me, and and renew renew (so (so far far as as may may be) be) our our past past relations relations of of the the olden olden time. time. i i confine confine myself myself to to throwing throwing out out the the observation, observation, that, that, at at the the hour hour and and place place i i have have indicated, indicated, may may be be found found such such ruined ruined vestiges vestiges as as yet yet 'remain, 'remain, 'of 'of 'a 'a 'fallen 'fallen tower, tower, 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber. micawber. 'p.s. 'p.s. it it may may be be advisable advisable to to superadd superadd to to the the above, above, the the statement statement that that mrs. mrs. micawber micawber is is not not in in confidential confidential possession possession of of my my intentions.' intentions.' i i read read the the letter letter over over several several times. times. making making due due allowance allowance for for mr. mr. micawber's micawber's lofty lofty style style of of composition, composition, and and for for the the extraordinary extraordinary relish relish with with which which he he sat sat down down and and wrote wrote long long letters letters on on all all possible possible and and impossible impossible occasions, occasions, i i still still believed believed that that something something important important lay lay hidden hidden at at the the bottom bottom of of this this roundabout roundabout communication. communication. i i put put it it down, down, to to think think about about it; it; and and took took it it up up again, again, to to read read it it once once more; more; and and was was still still pursuing pursuing it, it, when when traddles traddles found found me me in in the the height height of of my my perplexity. perplexity. 'my 'my dear dear fellow,' fellow,' said said i, i, 'i 'i never never was was better better pleased pleased to to see see you. you come come to to give give me me the the benefit benefit of of your your sober sober judgement judgement at at a a most most opportune opportune time. time. i i have have received received a a very very singular singular letter, letter, traddles, traddles, from from mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' 'no?' 'no?' cried cried traddles. traddles. 'you don't don't say say so? so? and and i i have have received received one one from from mrs. mrs. micawber!' micawber!' with with that, that, traddles, traddles, who who was was flushed flushed with with walking, walking, and and whose whose hair, hair, under under the the combined combined effects effects of of exercise exercise and and excitement, excitement, stood stood on on end end as as if if he he saw saw a a cheerful cheerful ghost, ghost, produced produced his his letter letter and and made made an an exchange exchange with with me. me. i i watched watched him him into into the the heart heart of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's letter, letter, and and returned returned the the elevation elevation of of eyebrows eyebrows with with which which he he said said "'wielding "'wielding the the thunderbolt, thunderbolt, or or directing directing the the devouring devouring and and avenging avenging flame!" flame!" bless bless me, me, copperfield!' copperfield!' -- -- and and then then entered entered on on the the perusal perusal of of mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's epistle. epistle. it it ran ran thus: thus: 'my 'my best best regards regards to to mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, and and if if he he should should still still remember remember one one who who formerly formerly had had the the happiness happiness of of being being well well acquainted acquainted with with him, him, may may i i beg beg a a few few moments moments of of his his leisure leisure time? time? i i assure assure mr. mr. t. t. t. t. that that i i would would not not intrude intrude upon upon his his kindness, kindness, were were i i in in any any other other position position than than on on the the confines confines of of distraction. distraction. 'though 'though harrowing harrowing to to myself myself to to mention, mention, the the alienation alienation of of mr. mr. micawber micawber (formerly (formerly so so domesticated) domesticated) from from his his wife wife and and family, family, is is the the cause cause of of my my addressing addressing my my unhappy unhappy appeal appeal to to mr. mr. traddles, traddles, and and soliciting soliciting his his best best indulgence. indulgence. mr. mr. t. t. can can form form no no adequate adequate idea idea of of the the change change in in mr. mr. micawber's micawber's conduct, conduct, of of his his wildness, wildness, of of his his violence. violence. it it has has gradually gradually augmented, augmented, until until it it assumes assumes the the appearance appearance of of aberration aberration of of intellect. intellect. scarcely scarcely a a day day passes, passes, i i assure assure mr. mr. traddles, traddles, on on which which some some paroxysm paroxysm does does not not take take place. place. mr. mr. t. t. will will not not require require me me to to depict depict my my feelings, feelings, when when i i inform inform him him that that i i have have become become accustomed accustomed to to hear hear mr. mr. micawber micawber assert assert that that he he has has sold sold himself himself to to the the d. d. mystery mystery and and secrecy secrecy have have long long been been his his principal principal characteristic, characteristic, have have long long replaced replaced unlimited unlimited confidence. confidence. the the slightest slightest provocation, provocation, even even being being asked asked if if there there is is anything anything he he would would prefer prefer for for dinner, dinner, causes causes him him to to express express a a wish wish for for a a separation. separation. last last night, night, on on being being childishly childishly solicited solicited for for twopence, twopence, to to buy buy 'lemon-stunners' 'lemon-stunners' -- -- a a local local sweetmeat sweetmeat -- -- he he presented presented an an oyster-knife oyster-knife at at the the twins! twins! 'i 'i entreat entreat mr. mr. traddles traddles to to bear bear with with me me in in entering entering into into these these details. details. without without them, them, mr. mr. t. t. would would indeed indeed find find it it difficult difficult to to form form the the faintest faintest conception conception of of my my heart-rending heart-rending situation. situation. 'may 'may i i now now venture venture to to confide confide to to mr. mr. t. t. the the purport purport of of my my letter? letter? will will he he now now allow allow me me to to throw throw myself myself on on his his friendly friendly consideration? consideration? oh oh yes, yes, for for i i know know his his heart! heart! 'the 'the quick quick eye eye of of affection affection is is not not easily easily blinded, blinded, when when of of the the female female sex. sex. mr. mr. micawber micawber is is going going to to london. london. though though he he studiously studiously concealed concealed his his hand, hand, this this morning morning before before breakfast, breakfast, in in writing writing the the direction-card direction-card which which he he attached attached to to the the little little brown brown valise valise of of happier happier days, days, the the eagle-glance eagle-glance of of matrimonial matrimonial anxiety anxiety detected, detected, d, d, o, o, n, n, distinctly distinctly traced. traced. the the west-end west-end destination destination of of the the coach, coach, is is the the golden golden cross. cross. dare dare i i fervently fervently implore implore mr. mr. t. t. to to see see my my misguided misguided husband, husband, and and to to reason reason with with him? him? dare dare i i ask ask mr. mr. t. t. to to endeavour endeavour to to step step in in between between mr. mr. micawber micawber and and his his agonized agonized family? family? oh oh no, no, for for that that would would be be too too much! much! 'if 'if mr. mr. copperfield copperfield should should yet yet remember remember one one unknown unknown to to fame, fame, will will mr. mr. t. t. take take charge charge of of my my unalterable unalterable regards regards and and similar similar entreaties? entreaties? in in any any case, case, he he will will have have the the benevolence benevolence to to consider consider this this communication communication strictly strictly private, private, and and on on no no account account whatever whatever to to be be alluded alluded to, to, however however distantly, distantly, in in the the presence presence of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. if if mr. mr. t. t. should should ever ever reply reply to to it it (which (which i i cannot cannot but but feel feel to to be be most most improbable), improbable), a a letter letter addressed addressed to to m. m. e., e., post post office, office, canterbury, canterbury, will will be be fraught fraught with with less less painful painful consequences consequences than than any any addressed addressed immediately immediately to to one, one, who who subscribes subscribes herself, herself, in in extreme extreme distress, distress, 'mr. 'mr. thomas thomas traddles's traddles's respectful respectful friend friend and and suppliant, suppliant, 'emma 'emma micawber.' micawber.' 'what 'what do do you think think of of that that letter?' letter?' said said traddles, traddles, casting casting his his eyes eyes upon upon me, me, when when i i had had read read it it twice. twice. 'what 'what do do you think think of of the the other?' other?' said said i. i. for for he he was was still still reading reading it it with with knitted knitted brows. brows. 'i 'i think think that that the the two two together, together, copperfield,' copperfield,' replied replied traddles, traddles, 'mean 'mean more more than than mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber usually usually mean mean in in their their correspondence correspondence -- -- but but i i don't don't know know what. what. they they are are both both written written in in good good faith, faith, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, and and without without any any collusion. collusion. poor poor thing!' thing!' he he was was now now alluding alluding to to mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's letter, letter, and and we we were were standing standing side side by by side side comparing comparing the the two; two; 'it 'it will will be be a a charity charity to to write write to to her, her, at at all all events, events, and and tell tell her her that that we we will will not not fail fail to to see see mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' i i acceded acceded to to this this the the more more readily, readily, because because i i now now reproached reproached myself myself with with having having treated treated her her former former letter letter rather rather lightly. lightly. it it had had set set me me thinking thinking a a good good deal deal at at the the time, time, as as i i have have mentioned mentioned in in its its place; place; but but my my absorption absorption in in my my own own affairs, affairs, my my experience experience of of the the family, family, and and my my hearing hearing nothing nothing more, more, had had gradually gradually ended ended in in my my dismissing dismissing the the subject. subject. i i had had often often thought thought of of the the micawbers, micawbers, but but chiefly chiefly to to wonder wonder what what 'pecuniary 'pecuniary liabilities' liabilities' they they were were establishing establishing in in canterbury, canterbury, and and to to recall recall how how shy shy mr. mr. micawber micawber was was of of me me when when he he became became clerk clerk to to uriah uriah heep. heep. however, however, i i now now wrote wrote a a comforting comforting letter letter to to mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, in in our our joint joint names, names, and and we we both both signed signed it. it. as as we we walked walked into into town town to to post post it, it, traddles traddles and and i i held held a a long long conference, conference, and and launched launched into into a a number number of of speculations, speculations, which which i i need need not not repeat. repeat. we we took took my my aunt aunt into into our our counsels counsels in in the the afternoon; afternoon; but but our our only only decided decided conclusion conclusion was, was, that that we we would would be be very very punctual punctual in in keeping keeping mr. mr. micawber's micawber's appointment. appointment. although although we we appeared appeared at at the the stipulated stipulated place place a a quarter quarter of of an an hour hour before before the the time, time, we we found found mr. mr. micawber micawber already already there. there. he he was was standing standing with with his his arms arms folded, folded, over over against against the the wall, wall, looking looking at at the the spikes spikes on on the the top, top, with with a a sentimental sentimental expression, expression, as as if if they they were were the the interlacing interlacing boughs boughs of of trees trees that that had had shaded shaded him him in in his his youth. youth. when when we we accosted accosted him, him, his his manner manner was was something something more more confused, confused, and and something something less less genteel, genteel, than than of of yore. yore. he he had had relinquished relinquished his his legal legal suit suit of of black black for for the the purposes purposes of of this this excursion, excursion, and and wore wore the the old old surtout surtout and and tights, tights, but but not not quite quite with with the the old old air. air. he he gradually gradually picked picked up up more more and and more more of of it it as as we we conversed conversed with with him; him; but, but, his his very very eye-glass eye-glass seemed seemed to to hang hang less less easily, easily, and and his his shirt-collar, shirt-collar, though though still still of of the the old old formidable formidable dimensions, dimensions, rather rather drooped. drooped. 'gentlemen!' 'gentlemen!' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, after after the the first first salutations, salutations, 'you are are friends friends in in need, need, and and friends friends indeed. indeed. allow allow me me to to offer offer my my inquiries inquiries with with reference reference to to the the physical physical welfare welfare of of mrs. mrs. copperfield copperfield in in esse, esse, and and mrs. mrs. traddles traddles in in posse, posse, -- -- presuming, presuming, that that is is to to say, say, that that my my friend friend mr. mr. traddles traddles is is not not yet yet united united to to the the object object of of his his affections, affections, for for weal weal and and for for woe.' woe.' we we acknowledged acknowledged his his politeness, politeness, and and made made suitable suitable replies. replies. he he then then directed directed our our attention attention to to the the wall, wall, and and was was beginning, beginning, 'i 'i assure assure you, gentlemen,' gentlemen,' when when i i ventured ventured to to object object to to that that ceremonious ceremonious form form of of address, address, and and to to beg beg that that he he would would speak speak to to us us in in the the old old way. way. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' he he returned, returned, pressing pressing my my hand, hand, 'your 'your cordiality cordiality overpowers overpowers me. me. this this reception reception of of a a shattered shattered fragment fragment of of the the temple temple once once called called man man -- -- if if i i may may be be permitted permitted so so to to express express myself myself -- -- bespeaks bespeaks a a heart heart that that is is an an honour honour to to our our common common nature. nature. i i was was about about to to observe observe that that i i again again behold behold the the serene serene spot spot where where some some of of the the happiest happiest hours hours of of my my existence existence fleeted fleeted by.' by.' 'made 'made so, so, i i am am sure, sure, by by mrs. mrs. micawber,' micawber,' said said i. i. 'i 'i hope hope she she is is well?' well?' 'thank 'thank you,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, whose whose face face clouded clouded at at this this reference, reference, 'she 'she is is but but so-so. so-so. and and this,' this,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, nodding nodding his his head head sorrowfully, sorrowfully, 'is 'is the the bench! bench! where, where, for for the the first first time time in in many many revolving revolving years, years, the the overwhelming overwhelming pressure pressure of of pecuniary pecuniary liabilities liabilities was was not not proclaimed, proclaimed, from from day day to to day, day, by by importune importune voices voices declining declining to to vacate vacate the the passage; passage; where where there there was was no no knocker knocker on on the the door door for for any any creditor creditor to to appeal appeal to; to; where where personal personal service service of of process process was was not not required, required, and and detainees detainees were were merely merely lodged lodged at at the the gate! gate! gentlemen,' gentlemen,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'when 'when the the shadow shadow of of that that iron-work iron-work on on the the summit summit of of the the brick brick structure structure has has been been reflected reflected on on the the gravel gravel of of the the parade, parade, i i have have seen seen my my children children thread thread the the mazes mazes of of the the intricate intricate pattern, pattern, avoiding avoiding the the dark dark marks. marks. i i have have been been familiar familiar with with every every stone stone in in the the place. place. if if i i betray betray weakness, weakness, you will will know know how how to to excuse excuse me.' me.' 'we 'we have have all all got got on on in in life life since since then, then, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i. i. 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, bitterly, bitterly, 'when 'when i i was was an an inmate inmate of of that that retreat retreat i i could could look look my my fellow-man fellow-man in in the the face, face, and and punch punch his his head head if if he he offended offended me. me. my my fellow-man fellow-man and and myself myself are are no no longer longer on on those those glorious glorious terms!' terms!' turning turning from from the the building building in in a a downcast downcast manner, manner, mr. mr. micawber micawber accepted accepted my my proffered proffered arm arm on on one one side, side, and and the the proffered proffered arm arm of of traddles traddles on on the the other, other, and and walked walked away away between between us. us. 'there 'there are are some some landmarks,' landmarks,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber, micawber, looking looking fondly fondly back back over over his his shoulder, shoulder, 'on 'on the the road road to to the the tomb, tomb, which, which, but but for for the the impiety impiety of of the the aspiration, aspiration, a a man man would would wish wish never never to to have have passed. passed. such such is is the the bench bench in in my my chequered chequered career.' career.' 'oh, 'oh, you are are in in low low spirits, spirits, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said traddles. traddles. 'i 'i am, am, sir,' sir,' interposed interposed mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'i 'i hope,' hope,' said said traddles, traddles, 'it 'it is is not not because because you have have conceived conceived a a dislike dislike to to the the law law -- -- for for i i am am a a lawyer lawyer myself, myself, you know.' know.' mr. mr. micawber micawber answered answered not not a a word. word. 'how 'how is is our our friend friend heep, heep, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' said said i, i, after after a a silence. silence. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, bursting bursting into into a a state state of of much much excitement, excitement, and and turning turning pale, pale, 'if 'if you ask ask after after my my employer employer as as your your friend, friend, i i am am sorry sorry for for it; it; if if you ask ask after after him him as as my my friend, friend, i i sardonically sardonically smile smile at at it. it. in in whatever whatever capacity capacity you ask ask after after my my employer, employer, i i beg, beg, without without offence offence to to you, to to limit limit my my reply reply to to this this -- -- that that whatever whatever his his state state of of health health may may be, be, his his appearance appearance is is foxy: foxy: not not to to say say diabolical. diabolical. you will will allow allow me, me, as as a a private private individual, individual, to to decline decline pursuing pursuing a a subject subject which which has has lashed lashed me me to to the the utmost utmost verge verge of of desperation desperation in in my my professional professional capacity.' capacity.' i i expressed expressed my my regret regret for for having having innocently innocently touched touched upon upon a a theme theme that that roused roused him him so so much. much. 'may 'may i i ask,' ask,' said said i, i, 'without 'without any any hazard hazard of of repeating repeating the the mistake, mistake, how how my my old old friends friends mr. mr. and and miss miss wickfield wickfield are?' are?' 'miss 'miss wickfield,' wickfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, now now turning turning red, red, 'is, 'is, as as she she always always is, is, a a pattern, pattern, and and a a bright bright example. example. my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, she she is is the the only only starry starry spot spot in in a a miserable miserable existence. existence. my my respect respect for for that that young young lady, lady, my my admiration admiration of of her her character, character, my my devotion devotion to to her her for for her her love love and and truth, truth, and and goodness! goodness! -- -- take take me,' me,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'down 'down a a turning, turning, for, for, upon upon my my soul, soul, in in my my present present state state of of mind mind i i am am not not equal equal to to this!' this!' we we wheeled wheeled him him off off into into a a narrow narrow street, street, where where he he took took out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and stood stood with with his his back back to to a a wall. wall. if if i i looked looked as as gravely gravely at at him him as as traddles traddles did, did, he he must must have have found found our our company company by by no no means means inspiriting. inspiriting. 'it 'it is is my my fate,' fate,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, unfeignedly unfeignedly sobbing, sobbing, but but doing doing even even that, that, with with a a shadow shadow of of the the old old expression expression of of doing doing something something genteel; genteel; 'it 'it is is my my fate, fate, gentlemen, gentlemen, that that the the finer finer feelings feelings of of our our nature nature have have become become reproaches reproaches to to me. me. my my homage homage to to miss miss wickfield, wickfield, is is a a flight flight of of arrows arrows in in my my bosom. bosom. you had had better better leave leave me, me, if if you please, please, to to walk walk the the earth earth as as a a vagabond. vagabond. the the worm worm will will settle settle my my business business in in double-quick double-quick time.' time.' without without attending attending to to this this invocation, invocation, we we stood stood by, by, until until he he put put up up his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, pulled pulled up up his his shirt-collar, shirt-collar, and, and, to to delude delude any any person person in in the the neighbourhood neighbourhood who who might might have have been been observing observing him, him, hummed hummed a a tune tune with with his his hat hat very very much much on on one one side. side. i i then then mentioned mentioned -- -- not not knowing knowing what what might might be be lost lost if if we we lost lost sight sight of of him him yet yet -- -- that that it it would would give give me me great great pleasure pleasure to to introduce introduce him him to to my my aunt, aunt, if if he he would would ride ride out out to to highgate, highgate, where where a a bed bed was was at at his his service. service. 'you shall shall make make us us a a glass glass of of your your own own punch, punch, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i, i, 'and 'and forget forget whatever whatever you have have on on your your mind, mind, in in pleasanter pleasanter reminiscences.' reminiscences.' 'or, 'or, if if confiding confiding anything anything to to friends friends will will be be more more likely likely to to relieve relieve you, you shall shall impart impart it it to to us, us, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said traddles, traddles, prudently. prudently. 'gentlemen,' 'gentlemen,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'do 'do with with me me as as you will! will! i i am am a a straw straw upon upon the the surface surface of of the the deep, deep, and and am am tossed tossed in in all all directions directions by by the the elephants elephants -- -- i i beg beg your your pardon; pardon; i i should should have have said said the the elements.' elements.' we we walked walked on, on, arm-in-arm, arm-in-arm, again; again; found found the the coach coach in in the the act act of of starting; starting; and and arrived arrived at at highgate highgate without without encountering encountering any any difficulties difficulties by by the the way. way. i i was was very very uneasy uneasy and and very very uncertain uncertain in in my my mind mind what what to to say say or or do do for for the the best best -- -- so so was was traddles, traddles, evidently. evidently. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was for for the the most most part part plunged plunged into into deep deep gloom. gloom. he he occasionally occasionally made made an an attempt attempt to to smarten smarten himself, himself, and and hum hum the the fag-end fag-end of of a a tune; tune; but but his his relapses relapses into into profound profound melancholy melancholy were were only only made made the the more more impressive impressive by by the the mockery mockery of of a a hat hat exceedingly exceedingly on on one one side, side, and and a a shirt-collar shirt-collar pulled pulled up up to to his his eyes. eyes. we we went went to to my my aunt's aunt's house house rather rather than than to to mine, mine, because because of of dora's dora's not not being being well. well. my my aunt aunt presented presented herself herself on on being being sent sent for, for, and and welcomed welcomed mr. mr. micawber micawber with with gracious gracious cordiality. cordiality. mr. mr. micawber micawber kissed kissed her her hand, hand, retired retired to to the the window, window, and and pulling pulling out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, had had a a mental mental wrestle wrestle with with himself. himself. mr. mr. dick dick was was at at home. home. he he was was by by nature nature so so exceedingly exceedingly compassionate compassionate of of anyone anyone who who seemed seemed to to be be ill ill at at ease, ease, and and was was so so quick quick to to find find any any such such person person out, out, that that he he shook shook hands hands with with mr. mr. micawber, micawber, at at least least half-a-dozen half-a-dozen times times in in five five minutes. minutes. to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, in in his his trouble, trouble, this this warmth, warmth, on on the the part part of of a a stranger, stranger, was was so so extremely extremely touching, touching, that that he he could could only only say, say, on on the the occasion occasion of of each each successive successive shake, shake, 'my 'my dear dear sir, sir, you overpower overpower me!' me!' which which gratified gratified mr. mr. dick dick so so much, much, that that he he went went at at it it again again with with greater greater vigour vigour than than before. before. 'the 'the friendliness friendliness of of this this gentleman,' gentleman,' said said mr. mr. micawber micawber to to my my aunt, aunt, 'if 'if you will will allow allow me, me, ma'am, ma'am, to to cull cull a a figure figure of of speech speech from from the the vocabulary vocabulary of of our our coarser coarser national national sports sports -- -- floors floors me. me. to to a a man man who who is is struggling struggling with with a a complicated complicated burden burden of of perplexity perplexity and and disquiet, disquiet, such such a a reception reception is is trying, trying, i i assure assure you.' 'my 'my friend friend mr. mr. dick,' dick,' replied replied my my aunt aunt proudly, proudly, 'is 'is not not a a common common man.' man.' 'that 'that i i am am convinced convinced of,' of,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'my 'my dear dear sir!' sir!' for for mr. mr. dick dick was was shaking shaking hands hands with with him him again; again; 'i 'i am am deeply deeply sensible sensible of of your your cordiality!' cordiality!' 'how 'how do do you find find yourself?' yourself?' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, with with an an anxious anxious look. look. 'indifferent, 'indifferent, my my dear dear sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, sighing. sighing. 'you must must keep keep up up your your spirits,' spirits,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, 'and 'and make make yourself yourself as as comfortable comfortable as as possible.' possible.' mr. mr. micawber micawber was was quite quite overcome overcome by by these these friendly friendly words, words, and and by by finding finding mr. mr. dick's dick's hand hand again again within within his his own. own. 'it 'it has has been been my my lot,' lot,' he he observed, observed, 'to 'to meet, meet, in in the the diversified diversified panorama panorama of of human human existence, existence, with with an an occasional occasional oasis, oasis, but but never never with with one one so so green, green, so so gushing, gushing, as as the the present!' present!' at at another another time time i i should should have have been been amused amused by by this; this; but but i i felt felt that that we we were were all all constrained constrained and and uneasy, uneasy, and and i i watched watched mr. mr. micawber micawber so so anxiously, anxiously, in in his his vacillations vacillations between between an an evident evident disposition disposition to to reveal reveal something, something, and and a a counter-disposition counter-disposition to to reveal reveal nothing, nothing, that that i i was was in in a a perfect perfect fever. fever. traddles, traddles, sitting sitting on on the the edge edge of of his his chair, chair, with with his his eyes eyes wide wide open, open, and and his his hair hair more more emphatically emphatically erect erect than than ever, ever, stared stared by by turns turns at at the the ground ground and and at at mr. mr. micawber, micawber, without without so so much much as as attempting attempting to to put put in in a a word. word. my my aunt, aunt, though though i i saw saw that that her her shrewdest shrewdest observation observation was was concentrated concentrated on on her her new new guest, guest, had had more more useful useful possession possession of of her her wits wits than than either either of of us; us; for for she she held held him him in in conversation, conversation, and and made made it it necessary necessary for for him him to to talk, talk, whether whether he he liked liked it it or or not. not. 'you are are a a very very old old friend friend of of my my nephew's, nephew's, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i wish wish i i had had had had the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing you before.' before.' 'madam,' 'madam,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i wish wish i i had had had had the the honour honour of of knowing knowing you at at an an earlier earlier period. period. i i was was not not always always the the wreck wreck you at at present present behold.' behold.' 'i 'i hope hope mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and your your family family are are well, well, sir,' sir,' said said my my aunt. aunt. mr. mr. micawber micawber inclined inclined his his head. head. 'they 'they are are as as well, well, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he desperately desperately observed observed after after a a pause, pause, 'as 'as aliens aliens and and outcasts outcasts can can ever ever hope hope to to be.' be.' 'lord 'lord bless bless you, sir!' sir!' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt, aunt, in in her her abrupt abrupt way. way. 'what 'what are are you talking talking about?' about?' 'the 'the subsistence subsistence of of my my family, family, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'trembles 'trembles in in the the balance. balance. my my employer employer -- -- ' ' here here mr. mr. micawber micawber provokingly provokingly left left off; off; and and began began to to peel peel the the lemons lemons that that had had been been under under my my directions directions set set before before him, him, together together with with all all the the other other appliances appliances he he used used in in making making punch. punch. 'your 'your employer, employer, you know,' know,' said said mr. mr. dick, dick, jogging jogging his his arm arm as as a a gentle gentle reminder. reminder. 'my 'my good good sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'you recall recall me, me, i i am am obliged obliged to to you.' they they shook shook hands hands again. again. 'my 'my employer, employer, ma'am ma'am -- -- mr. mr. heep heep -- -- once once did did me me the the favour favour to to observe observe to to me, me, that that if if i i were were not not in in the the receipt receipt of of the the stipendiary stipendiary emoluments emoluments appertaining appertaining to to my my engagement engagement with with him, him, i i should should probably probably be be a a mountebank mountebank about about the the country, country, swallowing swallowing a a sword-blade, sword-blade, and and eating eating the the devouring devouring element. element. for for anything anything that that i i can can perceive perceive to to the the contrary, contrary, it it is is still still probable probable that that my my children children may may be be reduced reduced to to seek seek a a livelihood livelihood by by personal personal contortion, contortion, while while mrs. mrs. micawber micawber abets abets their their unnatural unnatural feats feats by by playing playing the the barrel-organ.' barrel-organ.' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a random random but but expressive expressive flourish flourish of of his his knife, knife, signified signified that that these these performances performances might might be be expected expected to to take take place place after after he he was was no no more; more; then then resumed resumed his his peeling peeling with with a a desperate desperate air. air. my my aunt aunt leaned leaned her her elbow elbow on on the the little little round round table table that that she she usually usually kept kept beside beside her, her, and and eyed eyed him him attentively. attentively. notwithstanding notwithstanding the the aversion aversion with with which which i i regarded regarded the the idea idea of of entrapping entrapping him him into into any any disclosure disclosure he he was was not not prepared prepared to to make make voluntarily, voluntarily, i i should should have have taken taken him him up up at at this this point, point, but but for for the the strange strange proceedings proceedings in in which which i i saw saw him him engaged; engaged; whereof whereof his his putting putting the the lemon-peel lemon-peel into into the the kettle, kettle, the the sugar sugar into into the the snuffer-tray, snuffer-tray, the the spirit spirit into into the the empty empty jug, jug, and and confidently confidently attempting attempting to to pour pour boiling boiling water water out out of of a a candlestick, candlestick, were were among among the the most most remarkable. remarkable. i i saw saw that that a a crisis crisis was was at at hand, hand, and and it it came. came. he he clattered clattered all all his his means means and and implements implements together, together, rose rose from from his his chair, chair, pulled pulled out out his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and burst burst into into tears. tears. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, behind behind his his handkerchief, handkerchief, 'this 'this is is an an occupation, occupation, of of all all others, others, requiring requiring an an untroubled untroubled mind, mind, and and self-respect. self-respect. i i cannot cannot perform perform it. it. it it is is out out of of the the question.' question.' 'mr. 'mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i, i, 'what 'what is is the the matter? matter? pray pray speak speak out. out. you are are among among friends.' friends.' 'among 'among friends, friends, sir!' sir!' repeated repeated mr. mr. micawber; micawber; and and all all he he had had reserved reserved came came breaking breaking out out of of him. him. 'good 'good heavens, heavens, it it is is principally principally because because i i am am among among friends friends that that my my state state of of mind mind is is what what it it is. is. what what is is the the matter, matter, gentlemen? gentlemen? what what is is not not the the matter? matter? villainy villainy is is the the matter; matter; baseness baseness is is the the matter; matter; deception, deception, fraud, fraud, conspiracy, conspiracy, are are the the matter; matter; and and the the name name of of the the whole whole atrocious atrocious mass mass is is -- -- heep!' heep!' my my aunt aunt clapped clapped her her hands, hands, and and we we all all started started up up as as if if we we were were possessed. possessed. 'the 'the struggle struggle is is over!' over!' said said mr. mr. micawber micawber violently violently gesticulating gesticulating with with his his pocket-handkerchief, pocket-handkerchief, and and fairly fairly striking striking out out from from time time to to time time with with both both arms, arms, as as if if he he were were swimming swimming under under superhuman superhuman difficulties. difficulties. 'i 'i will will lead lead this this life life no no longer. longer. i i am am a a wretched wretched being, being, cut cut off off from from everything everything that that makes makes life life tolerable. tolerable. i i have have been been under under a a taboo taboo in in that that infernal infernal scoundrel's scoundrel's service. service. give give me me back back my my wife, wife, give give me me back back my my family, family, substitute substitute micawber micawber for for the the petty petty wretch wretch who who walks walks about about in in the the boots boots at at present present on on my my feet, feet, and and call call upon upon me me to to swallow swallow a a sword sword tomorrow, tomorrow, and and i'll i'll do do it. it. with with an an appetite!' appetite!' i i never never saw saw a a man man so so hot hot in in my my life. life. i i tried tried to to calm calm him, him, that that we we might might come come to to something something rational; rational; but but he he got got hotter hotter and and hotter, hotter, and and wouldn't wouldn't hear hear a a word. word. 'i'll 'i'll put put my my hand hand in in no no man's man's hand,' hand,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, gasping, gasping, puffing, puffing, and and sobbing, sobbing, to to that that degree degree that that he he was was like like a a man man fighting fighting with with cold cold water, water, 'until 'until i i have have -- -- blown blown to to fragments fragments -- -- the the -- -- a a -- -- detestable detestable -- -- serpent serpent -- -- heep! heep! i'll i'll partake partake of of no no one's one's hospitality, hospitality, until until i i have have -- -- a a -- -- moved moved mount mount vesuvius vesuvius -- -- to to eruption eruption -- -- on on -- -- a a -- -- the the abandoned abandoned rascal rascal -- -- heep! heep! refreshment refreshment -- -- a a -- -- underneath underneath this this roof roof -- -- particularly particularly punch punch -- -- would would -- -- a a -- -- choke choke me me -- -- unless unless -- -- i i had had -- -- previously previously -- -- choked choked the the eyes eyes -- -- out out of of the the head head -- -- a a -- -- of of -- -- interminable interminable cheat, cheat, and and liar liar -- -- heep! heep! i i -- -- a a -- -- i'll i'll know know nobody nobody -- -- and and -- -- a a -- -- say say nothing nothing -- -- and and -- -- a a -- -- live live nowhere nowhere -- -- until until i i have have crushed crushed -- -- to to -- -- a a -- -- undiscoverable undiscoverable atoms atoms -- -- the the -- -- transcendent transcendent and and immortal immortal hypocrite hypocrite and and perjurer perjurer -- -- heep!' heep!' i i really really had had some some fear fear of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's dying dying on on the the spot. spot. the the manner manner in in which which he he struggled struggled through through these these inarticulate inarticulate sentences, sentences, and, and, whenever whenever he he found found himself himself getting getting near near the the name name of of heep, heep, fought fought his his way way on on to to it, it, dashed dashed at at it it in in a a fainting fainting state, state, and and brought brought it it out out with with a a vehemence vehemence little little less less than than marvellous, marvellous, was was frightful; frightful; but but now, now, when when he he sank sank into into a a chair, chair, steaming, steaming, and and looked looked at at us, us, with with every every possible possible colour colour in in his his face face that that had had no no business business there, there, and and an an endless endless procession procession of of lumps lumps following following one one another another in in hot hot haste haste up up his his throat, throat, whence whence they they seemed seemed to to shoot shoot into into his his forehead, forehead, he he had had the the appearance appearance of of being being in in the the last last extremity. extremity. i i would would have have gone gone to to his his assistance, assistance, but but he he waved waved me me off, off, and and wouldn't wouldn't hear hear a a word. word. 'no, 'no, copperfield! copperfield! -- -- no no communication communication -- -- a a -- -- until until -- -- miss miss wickfield wickfield -- -- a a -- -- redress redress from from wrongs wrongs inflicted inflicted by by consummate consummate scoundrel scoundrel -- -- heep!' heep!' (i (i am am quite quite convinced convinced he he could could not not have have uttered uttered three three words, words, but but for for the the amazing amazing energy energy with with which which this this word word inspired inspired him him when when he he felt felt it it coming.) coming.) 'inviolable 'inviolable secret secret -- -- a a -- -- from from the the whole whole world world -- -- a a -- -- no no exceptions exceptions -- -- this this day day week week -- -- a a -- -- at at breakfast-time breakfast-time -- -- a a -- -- everybody everybody present present -- -- including including aunt aunt -- -- a a -- -- and and extremely extremely friendly friendly gentleman gentleman -- -- to to be be at at the the hotel hotel at at canterbury canterbury -- -- a a -- -- where where -- -- mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and myself myself -- -- auld auld lang lang syne syne in in chorus chorus -- -- and and -- -- a a -- -- will will expose expose intolerable intolerable ruffian ruffian -- -- heep! heep! no no more more to to say say -- -- a a -- -- or or listen listen to to persuasion persuasion -- -- go go immediately immediately -- -- not not capable capable -- -- a a -- -- bear bear society society -- -- upon upon the the track track of of devoted devoted and and doomed doomed traitor traitor -- -- heep!' heep!' with with this this last last repetition repetition of of the the magic magic word word that that had had kept kept him him going going at at all, all, and and in in which which he he surpassed surpassed all all his his previous previous efforts, efforts, mr. mr. micawber micawber rushed rushed out out of of the the house; house; leaving leaving us us in in a a state state of of excitement, excitement, hope, hope, and and wonder, wonder, that that reduced reduced us us to to a a condition condition little little better better than than his his own. own. but but even even then then his his passion passion for for writing writing letters letters was was too too strong strong to to be be resisted; resisted; for for while while we we were were yet yet in in the the height height of of our our excitement, excitement, hope, hope, and and wonder, wonder, the the following following pastoral pastoral note note was was brought brought to to me me from from a a neighbouring neighbouring tavern, tavern, at at which which he he had had called called to to write write it: it: -- -- 'most 'most secret secret and and confidential. confidential. 'my 'my dear dear sir, sir, 'i 'i beg beg to to be be allowed allowed to to convey, convey, through through you, my my apologies apologies to to your your excellent excellent aunt aunt for for my my late late excitement. excitement. an an explosion explosion of of a a smouldering smouldering volcano volcano long long suppressed, suppressed, was was the the result result of of an an internal internal contest contest more more easily easily conceived conceived than than described. described. 'i 'i trust trust i i rendered rendered tolerably tolerably intelligible intelligible my my appointment appointment for for the the morning morning of of this this day day week, week, at at the the house house of of public public entertainment entertainment at at canterbury, canterbury, where where mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and myself myself had had once once the the honour honour of of uniting uniting our our voices voices to to yours, yours, in in the the well-known well-known strain strain of of the the immortal immortal exciseman exciseman nurtured nurtured beyond beyond the the tweed. tweed. 'the 'the duty duty done, done, and and act act of of reparation reparation performed, performed, which which can can alone alone enable enable me me to to contemplate contemplate my my fellow fellow mortal, mortal, i i shall shall be be known known no no more. more. i i shall shall simply simply require require to to be be deposited deposited in in that that place place of of universal universal resort, resort, where where each each in in his his narrow narrow cell cell for for ever ever laid, laid, the the rude rude forefathers forefathers of of the the hamlet hamlet sleep, sleep, ' ' -- -- with with the the plain plain inscription, inscription, 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber.' micawber.' chapter chapter 50. 50. mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's dream dream comes comes true true by by this this time, time, some some months months had had passed passed since since our our interview interview on on the the bank bank of of the the river river with with martha. martha. i i had had never never seen seen her her since, since, but but she she had had communicated communicated with with mr. mr. peggotty peggotty on on several several occasions. occasions. nothing nothing had had come come of of her her zealous zealous intervention; intervention; nor nor could could i i infer, infer, from from what what he he told told me, me, that that any any clue clue had had been been obtained, obtained, for for a a moment, moment, to to emily's emily's fate. fate. i i confess confess that that i i began began to to despair despair of of her her recovery, recovery, and and gradually gradually to to sink sink deeper deeper and and deeper deeper into into the the belief belief that that she she was was dead. dead. his his conviction conviction remained remained unchanged. unchanged. so so far far as as i i know know -- -- and and i i believe believe his his honest honest heart heart was was transparent transparent to to me me -- -- he he never never wavered wavered again, again, in in his his solemn solemn certainty certainty of of finding finding her. her. his his patience patience never never tired. tired. and, and, although although i i trembled trembled for for the the agony agony it it might might one one day day be be to to him him to to have have his his strong strong assurance assurance shivered shivered at at a a blow, blow, there there was was something something so so religious religious in in it, it, so so affectingly affectingly expressive expressive of of its its anchor anchor being being in in the the purest purest depths depths of of his his fine fine nature, nature, that that the the respect respect and and honour honour in in which which i i held held him him were were exalted exalted every every day. day. his his was was not not a a lazy lazy trustfulness trustfulness that that hoped, hoped, and and did did no no more. more. he he had had been been a a man man of of sturdy sturdy action action all all his his life, life, and and he he knew knew that that in in all all things things wherein wherein he he wanted wanted help help he he must must do do his his own own part part faithfully, faithfully, and and help help himself. himself. i i have have known known him him set set out out in in the the night, night, on on a a misgiving misgiving that that the the light light might might not not be, be, by by some some accident, accident, in in the the window window of of the the old old boat, boat, and and walk walk to to yarmouth. yarmouth. i i have have known known him, him, on on reading reading something something in in the the newspaper newspaper that that might might apply apply to to her, her, take take up up his his stick, stick, and and go go forth forth on on a a journey journey of of three three -- -- or or four-score four-score miles. miles. he he made made his his way way by by sea sea to to naples, naples, and and back, back, after after hearing hearing the the narrative narrative to to which which miss miss dartle dartle had had assisted assisted me. me. all all his his journeys journeys were were ruggedly ruggedly performed; performed; for for he he was was always always steadfast steadfast in in a a purpose purpose of of saving saving money money for for emily's emily's sake, sake, when when she she should should be be found. found. in in all all this this long long pursuit, pursuit, i i never never heard heard him him repine; repine; i i never never heard heard him him say say he he was was fatigued, fatigued, or or out out of of heart. heart. dora dora had had often often seen seen him him since since our our marriage, marriage, and and was was quite quite fond fond of of him. him. i i fancy fancy his his figure figure before before me me now, now, standing standing near near her her sofa, sofa, with with his his rough rough cap cap in in his his hand, hand, and and the the blue blue eyes eyes of of my my child-wife child-wife raised, raised, with with a a timid timid wonder, wonder, to to his his face. face. sometimes sometimes of of an an evening, evening, about about twilight, twilight, when when he he came came to to talk talk with with me, me, i i would would induce induce him him to to smoke smoke his his pipe pipe in in the the garden, garden, as as we we slowly slowly paced paced to to and and fro fro together; together; and and then, then, the the picture picture of of his his deserted deserted home, home, and and the the comfortable comfortable air air it it used used to to have have in in my my childish childish eyes eyes of of an an evening evening when when the the fire fire was was burning, burning, and and the the wind wind moaning moaning round round it, it, came came most most vividly vividly into into my my mind. mind. one one evening, evening, at at this this hour, hour, he he told told me me that that he he had had found found martha martha waiting waiting near near his his lodging lodging on on the the preceding preceding night night when when he he came came out, out, and and that that she she had had asked asked him him not not to to leave leave london london on on any any account, account, until until he he should should have have seen seen her her again. again. 'did 'did she she tell tell you why?' why?' i i inquired. inquired. 'i 'i asked asked her, her, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he replied, replied, 'but 'but it it is is but but few few words words as as she she ever ever says, says, and and she she on'y on'y got got my my promise promise and and so so went went away.' away.' 'did 'did she she say say when when you might might expect expect to to see see her her again?' again?' i i demanded. demanded. 'no, 'no, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he returned, returned, drawing drawing his his hand hand thoughtfully thoughtfully down down his his face. face. 'i 'i asked asked that that too; too; but but it it was was more more (she (she said) said) than than she she could could tell.' tell.' as as i i had had long long forborne forborne to to encourage encourage him him with with hopes hopes that that hung hung on on threads, threads, i i made made no no other other comment comment on on this this information information than than that that i i supposed supposed he he would would see see her her soon. soon. such such speculations speculations as as it it engendered engendered within within me me i i kept kept to to myself, myself, and and those those were were faint faint enough. enough. i i was was walking walking alone alone in in the the garden, garden, one one evening, evening, about about a a fortnight fortnight afterwards. afterwards. i i remember remember that that evening evening well. well. it it was was the the second second in in mr. mr. micawber's micawber's week week of of suspense. suspense. there there had had been been rain rain all all day, day, and and there there was was a a damp damp feeling feeling in in the the air. air. the the leaves leaves were were thick thick upon upon the the trees, trees, and and heavy heavy with with wet; wet; but but the the rain rain had had ceased, ceased, though though the the sky sky was was still still dark; dark; and and the the hopeful hopeful birds birds were were singing singing cheerfully. cheerfully. as as i i walked walked to to and and fro fro in in the the garden, garden, and and the the twilight twilight began began to to close close around around me, me, their their little little voices voices were were hushed; hushed; and and that that peculiar peculiar silence silence which which belongs belongs to to such such an an evening evening in in the the country country when when the the lightest lightest trees trees are are quite quite still, still, save save for for the the occasional occasional droppings droppings from from their their boughs, boughs, prevailed. prevailed. there there was was a a little little green green perspective perspective of of trellis-work trellis-work and and ivy ivy at at the the side side of of our our cottage, cottage, through through which which i i could could see, see, from from the the garden garden where where i i was was walking, walking, into into the the road road before before the the house. house. i i happened happened to to turn turn my my eyes eyes towards towards this this place, place, as as i i was was thinking thinking of of many many things; things; and and i i saw saw a a figure figure beyond, beyond, dressed dressed in in a a plain plain cloak. cloak. it it was was bending bending eagerly eagerly towards towards me, me, and and beckoning. beckoning. 'martha!' 'martha!' said said i, i, going going to to it. it. 'can 'can you come come with with me?' me?' she she inquired, inquired, in in an an agitated agitated whisper. whisper. 'i 'i have have been been to to him, him, and and he he is is not not at at home. home. i i wrote wrote down down where where he he was was to to come, come, and and left left it it on on his his table table with with my my own own hand. hand. they they said said he he would would not not be be out out long. long. i i have have tidings tidings for for him. him. can can you come come directly?' directly?' my my answer answer was, was, to to pass pass out out at at the the gate gate immediately. immediately. she she made made a a hasty hasty gesture gesture with with her her hand, hand, as as if if to to entreat entreat my my patience patience and and my my silence, silence, and and turned turned towards towards london, london, whence, whence, as as her her dress dress betokened, betokened, she she had had come come expeditiously expeditiously on on foot. foot. i i asked asked her her if if that that were were not not our our destination? destination? on on her her motioning motioning yes, yes, with with the the same same hasty hasty gesture gesture as as before, before, i i stopped stopped an an empty empty coach coach that that was was coming coming by, by, and and we we got got into into it. it. when when i i asked asked her her where where the the coachman coachman was was to to drive, drive, she she answered, answered, 'anywhere 'anywhere near near golden golden square! square! and and quick!' quick!' -- -- then then shrunk shrunk into into a a corner, corner, with with one one trembling trembling hand hand before before her her face, face, and and the the other other making making the the former former gesture, gesture, as as if if she she could could not not bear bear a a voice. voice. now now much much disturbed, disturbed, and and dazzled dazzled with with conflicting conflicting gleams gleams of of hope hope and and dread, dread, i i looked looked at at her her for for some some explanation. explanation. but but seeing seeing how how strongly strongly she she desired desired to to remain remain quiet, quiet, and and feeling feeling that that it it was was my my own own natural natural inclination inclination too, too, at at such such a a time, time, i i did did not not attempt attempt to to break break the the silence. silence. we we proceeded proceeded without without a a word word being being spoken. spoken. sometimes sometimes she she glanced glanced out out of of the the window, window, as as though though she she thought thought we we were were going going slowly, slowly, though though indeed indeed we we were were going going fast; fast; but but otherwise otherwise remained remained exactly exactly as as at at first. first. we we alighted alighted at at one one of of the the entrances entrances to to the the square square she she had had mentioned, mentioned, where where i i directed directed the the coach coach to to wait, wait, not not knowing knowing but but that that we we might might have have some some occasion occasion for for it. it. she she laid laid her her hand hand on on my my arm, arm, and and hurried hurried me me on on to to one one of of the the sombre sombre streets, streets, of of which which there there are are several several in in that that part, part, where where the the houses houses were were once once fair fair dwellings dwellings in in the the occupation occupation of of single single families, families, but but have, have, and and had, had, long long degenerated degenerated into into poor poor lodgings lodgings let let off off in in rooms. rooms. entering entering at at the the open open door door of of one one of of these, these, and and releasing releasing my my arm, arm, she she beckoned beckoned me me to to follow follow her her up up the the common common staircase, staircase, which which was was like like a a tributary tributary channel channel to to the the street. street. the the house house swarmed swarmed with with inmates. inmates. as as we we went went up, up, doors doors of of rooms rooms were were opened opened and and people's people's heads heads put put out; out; and and we we passed passed other other people people on on the the stairs, stairs, who who were were coming coming down. down. in in glancing glancing up up from from the the outside, outside, before before we we entered, entered, i i had had seen seen women women and and children children lolling lolling at at the the windows windows over over flower-pots; flower-pots; and and we we seemed seemed to to have have attracted attracted their their curiosity, curiosity, for for these these were were principally principally the the observers observers who who looked looked out out of of their their doors. doors. it it was was a a broad broad panelled panelled staircase, staircase, with with massive massive balustrades balustrades of of some some dark dark wood; wood; cornices cornices above above the the doors, doors, ornamented ornamented with with carved carved fruit fruit and and flowers; flowers; and and broad broad seats seats in in the the windows. windows. but but all all these these tokens tokens of of past past grandeur grandeur were were miserably miserably decayed decayed and and dirty; dirty; rot, rot, damp, damp, and and age, age, had had weakened weakened the the flooring, flooring, which which in in many many places places was was unsound unsound and and even even unsafe. unsafe. some some attempts attempts had had been been made, made, i i noticed, noticed, to to infuse infuse new new blood blood into into this this dwindling dwindling frame, frame, by by repairing repairing the the costly costly old old wood-work wood-work here here and and there there with with common common deal; deal; but but it it was was like like the the marriage marriage of of a a reduced reduced old old noble noble to to a a plebeian plebeian pauper, pauper, and and each each party party to to the the ill-assorted ill-assorted union union shrunk shrunk away away from from the the other. other. several several of of the the back back windows windows on on the the staircase staircase had had been been darkened darkened or or wholly wholly blocked blocked up. up. in in those those that that remained, remained, there there was was scarcely scarcely any any glass; glass; and, and, through through the the crumbling crumbling frames frames by by which which the the bad bad air air seemed seemed always always to to come come in, in, and and never never to to go go out, out, i i saw, saw, through through other other glassless glassless windows, windows, into into other other houses houses in in a a similar similar condition, condition, and and looked looked giddily giddily down down into into a a wretched wretched yard, yard, which which was was the the common common dust-heap dust-heap of of the the mansion. mansion. we we proceeded proceeded to to the the top-storey top-storey of of the the house. house. two two or or three three times, times, by by the the way, way, i i thought thought i i observed observed in in the the indistinct indistinct light light the the skirts skirts of of a a female female figure figure going going up up before before us. us. as as we we turned turned to to ascend ascend the the last last flight flight of of stairs stairs between between us us and and the the roof, roof, we we caught caught a a full full view view of of this this figure figure pausing pausing for for a a moment, moment, at at a a door. door. then then it it turned turned the the handle, handle, and and went went in. in. 'what's 'what's this!' this!' said said martha, martha, in in a a whisper. whisper. 'she 'she has has gone gone into into my my room. room. i i don't don't know know her!' her!' i i knew knew her. her. i i had had recognized recognized her her with with amazement, amazement, for for miss miss dartle. dartle. i i said said something something to to the the effect effect that that it it was was a a lady lady whom whom i i had had seen seen before, before, in in a a few few words, words, to to my my conductress; conductress; and and had had scarcely scarcely done done so, so, when when we we heard heard her her voice voice in in the the room, room, though though not, not, from from where where we we stood, stood, what what she she was was saying. saying. martha, martha, with with an an astonished astonished look, look, repeated repeated her her former former action, action, and and softly softly led led me me up up the the stairs; stairs; and and then, then, by by a a little little back-door back-door which which seemed seemed to to have have no no lock, lock, and and which which she she pushed pushed open open with with a a touch, touch, into into a a small small empty empty garret garret with with a a low low sloping sloping roof, roof, little little better better than than a a cupboard. cupboard. between between this, this, and and the the room room she she had had called called hers, hers, there there was was a a small small door door of of communication, communication, standing standing partly partly open. open. here here we we stopped, stopped, breathless breathless with with our our ascent, ascent, and and she she placed placed her her hand hand lightly lightly on on my my lips. lips. i i could could only only see, see, of of the the room room beyond, beyond, that that it it was was pretty pretty large; large; that that there there was was a a bed bed in in it; it; and and that that there there were were some some common common pictures pictures of of ships ships upon upon the the walls. walls. i i could could not not see see miss miss dartle, dartle, or or the the person person whom whom we we had had heard heard her her address. address. certainly, certainly, my my companion companion could could not, not, for for my my position position was was the the best. best. a a dead dead silence silence prevailed prevailed for for some some moments. moments. martha martha kept kept one one hand hand on on my my lips, lips, and and raised raised the the other other in in a a listening listening attitude. attitude. 'it 'it matters matters little little to to me me her her not not being being at at home,' home,' said said rosa rosa dartle dartle haughtily, haughtily, 'i 'i know know nothing nothing of of her. her. it it is is you i i come come to to see.' see.' 'me?' 'me?' replied replied a a soft soft voice. voice. at at the the sound sound of of it, it, a a thrill thrill went went through through my my frame. frame. for for it it was was emily's! emily's! 'yes,' 'yes,' returned returned miss miss dartle, dartle, 'i 'i have have come come to to look look at at you. what? what? you are are not not ashamed ashamed of of the the face face that that has has done done so so much?' much?' the the resolute resolute and and unrelenting unrelenting hatred hatred of of her her tone, tone, its its cold cold stern stern sharpness, sharpness, and and its its mastered mastered rage, rage, presented presented her her before before me, me, as as if if i i had had seen seen her her standing standing in in the the light. light. i i saw saw the the flashing flashing black black eyes, eyes, and and the the passion-wasted passion-wasted figure; figure; and and i i saw saw the the scar, scar, with with its its white white track track cutting cutting through through her her lips, lips, quivering quivering and and throbbing throbbing as as she she spoke. spoke. 'i 'i have have come come to to see,' see,' she she said, said, 'james 'james steerforth's steerforth's fancy; fancy; the the girl girl who who ran ran away away with with him, him, and and is is the the town-talk town-talk of of the the commonest commonest people people of of her her native native place; place; the the bold, bold, flaunting, flaunting, practised practised companion companion of of persons persons like like james james steerforth. steerforth. i i want want to to know know what what such such a a thing thing is is like.' like.' there there was was a a rustle, rustle, as as if if the the unhappy unhappy girl, girl, on on whom whom she she heaped heaped these these taunts, taunts, ran ran towards towards the the door, door, and and the the speaker speaker swiftly swiftly interposed interposed herself herself before before it. it. it it was was succeeded succeeded by by a a moment's moment's pause. pause. when when miss miss dartle dartle spoke spoke again, again, it it was was through through her her set set teeth, teeth, and and with with a a stamp stamp upon upon the the ground. ground. 'stay 'stay there!' there!' she she said, said, 'or 'or i'll i'll proclaim proclaim you to to the the house, house, and and the the whole whole street! street! if if you try try to to evade evade me, me, i'll i'll stop stop you, if if it's it's by by the the hair, hair, and and raise raise the the very very stones stones against against you!' a a frightened frightened murmur murmur was was the the only only reply reply that that reached reached my my ears. ears. a a silence silence succeeded. succeeded. i i did did not not know know what what to to do. do. much much as as i i desired desired to to put put an an end end to to the the interview, interview, i i felt felt that that i i had had no no right right to to present present myself; myself; that that it it was was for for mr. mr. peggotty peggotty alone alone to to see see her her and and recover recover her. her. would would he he never never come? come? i i thought thought impatiently. impatiently. 'so!' 'so!' said said rosa rosa dartle, dartle, with with a a contemptuous contemptuous laugh, laugh, 'i 'i see see her her at at last! last! why, why, he he was was a a poor poor creature creature to to be be taken taken by by that that delicate delicate mock-modesty, mock-modesty, and and that that hanging hanging head!' head!' 'oh, 'oh, for for heaven's heaven's sake, sake, spare spare me!' me!' exclaimed exclaimed emily. emily. 'whoever 'whoever you are, are, you know know my my pitiable pitiable story, story, and and for for heaven's heaven's sake sake spare spare me, me, if if you would would be be spared spared yourself!' yourself!' 'if 'if i i would would be be spared!' spared!' returned returned the the other other fiercely; fiercely; 'what 'what is is there there in in common common between between us, us, do do you think!' think!' 'nothing 'nothing but but our our sex,' sex,' said said emily, emily, with with a a burst burst of of tears. tears. 'and 'and that,' that,' said said rosa rosa dartle, dartle, 'is 'is so so strong strong a a claim, claim, preferred preferred by by one one so so infamous, infamous, that that if if i i had had any any feeling feeling in in my my breast breast but but scorn scorn and and abhorrence abhorrence of of you, it it would would freeze freeze it it up. up. our our sex! sex! you are are an an honour honour to to our our sex!' sex!' 'i 'i have have deserved deserved this,' this,' said said emily, emily, 'but 'but it's it's dreadful! dreadful! dear, dear, dear dear lady, lady, think think what what i i have have suffered, suffered, and and how how i i am am fallen! fallen! oh, oh, martha, martha, come come back! back! oh, oh, home, home, home!' home!' miss miss dartle dartle placed placed herself herself in in a a chair, chair, within within view view of of the the door, door, and and looked looked downward, downward, as as if if emily emily were were crouching crouching on on the the floor floor before before her. her. being being now now between between me me and and the the light, light, i i could could see see her her curled curled lip, lip, and and her her cruel cruel eyes eyes intently intently fixed fixed on on one one place, place, with with a a greedy greedy triumph. triumph. 'listen 'listen to to what what i i say!' say!' she she said; said; 'and 'and reserve reserve your your false false arts arts for for your your dupes. dupes. do do you hope hope to to move move me me by by your your tears? tears? no no more more than than you could could charm charm me me by by your your smiles, smiles, you purchased purchased slave.' slave.' 'oh, 'oh, have have some some mercy mercy on on me!' me!' cried cried emily. emily. 'show 'show me me some some compassion, compassion, or or i i shall shall die die mad!' mad!' 'it 'it would would be be no no great great penance,' penance,' said said rosa rosa dartle, dartle, 'for 'for your your crimes. crimes. do do you know know what what you have have done? done? do do you ever ever think think of of the the home home you have have laid laid waste?' waste?' 'oh, 'oh, is is there there ever ever night night or or day, day, when when i i don't don't think think of of it!' it!' cried cried emily; emily; and and now now i i could could just just see see her, her, on on her her knees, knees, with with her her head head thrown thrown back, back, her her pale pale face face looking looking upward, upward, her her hands hands wildly wildly clasped clasped and and held held out, out, and and her her hair hair streaming streaming about about her. her. 'has 'has there there ever ever been been a a single single minute, minute, waking waking or or sleeping, sleeping, when when it it hasn't hasn't been been before before me, me, just just as as it it used used to to be be in in the the lost lost days days when when i i turned turned my my back back upon upon it it for for ever ever and and for for ever! ever! oh, oh, home, home, home! home! oh oh dear, dear, dear dear uncle, uncle, if if you ever ever could could have have known known the the agony agony your your love love would would cause cause me me when when i i fell fell away away from from good, good, you never never would would have have shown shown it it to to me me so so constant, constant, much much as as you felt felt it; it; but but would would have have been been angry angry to to me, me, at at least least once once in in my my life, life, that that i i might might have have had had some some comfort! comfort! i i have have none, none, none, none, no no comfort comfort upon upon earth, earth, for for all all of of them them were were always always fond fond of of me!' me!' she she dropped dropped on on her her face, face, before before the the imperious imperious figure figure in in the the chair, chair, with with an an imploring imploring effort effort to to clasp clasp the the skirt skirt of of her her dress. dress. rosa rosa dartle dartle sat sat looking looking down down upon upon her, her, as as inflexible inflexible as as a a figure figure of of brass. brass. her her lips lips were were tightly tightly compressed, compressed, as as if if she she knew knew that that she she must must keep keep a a strong strong constraint constraint upon upon herself herself -- -- i i write write what what i i sincerely sincerely believe believe -- -- or or she she would would be be tempted tempted to to strike strike the the beautiful beautiful form form with with her her foot. foot. i i saw saw her, her, distinctly, distinctly, and and the the whole whole power power of of her her face face and and character character seemed seemed forced forced into into that that expression. expression. -- -- -would -would he he never never come? come? 'the 'the miserable miserable vanity vanity of of these these earth-worms!' earth-worms!' she she said, said, when when she she had had so so far far controlled controlled the the angry angry heavings heavings of of her her breast, breast, that that she she could could trust trust herself herself to to speak. speak. 'your 'your home! home! do do you imagine imagine that that i i bestow bestow a a thought thought on on it, it, or or suppose suppose you could could do do any any harm harm to to that that low low place, place, which which money money would would not not pay pay for, for, and and handsomely? handsomely? your your home! home! you were were a a part part of of the the trade trade of of your your home, home, and and were were bought bought and and sold sold like like any any other other vendible vendible thing thing your your people people dealt dealt in.' in.' 'oh, 'oh, not not that!' that!' cried cried emily. emily. 'say 'say anything anything of of me; me; but but don't don't visit visit my my disgrace disgrace and and shame, shame, more more than than i i have have done, done, on on folks folks who who are are as as honourable honourable as as you! have have some some respect respect for for them, them, as as you are are a a lady, lady, if if you have have no no mercy mercy for for me.' me.' 'i 'i speak,' speak,' she she said, said, not not deigning deigning to to take take any any heed heed of of this this appeal, appeal, and and drawing drawing away away her her dress dress from from the the contamination contamination of of emily's emily's touch, touch, 'i 'i speak speak of of his his home home -- -- where where i i live. live. here,' here,' she she said, said, stretching stretching out out her her hand hand with with her her contemptuous contemptuous laugh, laugh, and and looking looking down down upon upon the the prostrate prostrate girl, girl, 'is 'is a a worthy worthy cause cause of of division division between between lady-mother lady-mother and and gentleman-son; gentleman-son; of of grief grief in in a a house house where where she she wouldn't wouldn't have have been been admitted admitted as as a a kitchen-girl; kitchen-girl; of of anger, anger, and and repining, repining, and and reproach. reproach. this this piece piece of of pollution, pollution, picked picked up up from from the the water-side, water-side, to to be be made made much much of of for for an an hour, hour, and and then then tossed tossed back back to to her her original original place!' place!' 'no! 'no! no!' no!' cried cried emily, emily, clasping clasping her her hands hands together. together. 'when 'when he he first first came came into into my my way way -- -- that that the the day day had had never never dawned dawned upon upon me, me, and and he he had had met met me me being being carried carried to to my my grave! grave! -- -- i i had had been been brought brought up up as as virtuous virtuous as as you or or any any lady, lady, and and was was going going to to be be the the wife wife of of as as good good a a man man as as you or or any any lady lady in in the the world world can can ever ever marry. marry. if if you live live in in his his home home and and know know him, him, you know, know, perhaps, perhaps, what what his his power power with with a a weak, weak, vain vain girl girl might might be. be. i i don't don't defend defend myself, myself, but but i i know know well, well, and and he he knows knows well, well, or or he he will will know know when when he he comes comes to to die, die, and and his his mind mind is is troubled troubled with with it, it, that that he he used used all all his his power power to to deceive deceive me, me, and and that that i i believed believed him, him, trusted trusted him, him, and and loved loved him!' him!' rosa rosa dartle dartle sprang sprang up up from from her her seat; seat; recoiled; recoiled; and and in in recoiling recoiling struck struck at at her, her, with with a a face face of of such such malignity, malignity, so so darkened darkened and and disfigured disfigured by by passion, passion, that that i i had had almost almost thrown thrown myself myself between between them. them. the the blow, blow, which which had had no no aim, aim, fell fell upon upon the the air. air. as as she she now now stood stood panting, panting, looking looking at at her her with with the the utmost utmost detestation detestation that that she she was was capable capable of of expressing, expressing, and and trembling trembling from from head head to to foot foot with with rage rage and and scorn, scorn, i i thought thought i i had had never never seen seen such such a a sight, sight, and and never never could could see see such such another. another. 'you love love him? him? you?' she she cried, cried, with with her her clenched clenched hand, hand, quivering quivering as as if if it it only only wanted wanted a a weapon weapon to to stab stab the the object object of of her her wrath. wrath. emily emily had had shrunk shrunk out out of of my my view. view. there there was was no no reply. reply. 'and 'and tell tell that that to to me,' me,' she she added, added, 'with 'with your your shameful shameful lips? lips? why why don't don't they they whip whip these these creatures? creatures? if if i i could could order order it it to to be be done, done, i i would would have have this this girl girl whipped whipped to to death.' death.' and and so so she she would, would, i i have have no no doubt. doubt. i i would would not not have have trusted trusted her her with with the the rack rack itself, itself, while while that that furious furious look look lasted. lasted. she she slowly, slowly, very very slowly, slowly, broke broke into into a a laugh, laugh, and and pointed pointed at at emily emily with with her her hand, hand, as as if if she she were were a a sight sight of of shame shame for for gods gods and and men. men. 'she 'she love!' love!' she she said. said. 'that 'that carrion! carrion! and and he he ever ever cared cared for for her, her, she'd she'd tell tell me. me. ha, ha, ha! ha! the the liars liars that that these these traders traders are!' are!' her her mockery mockery was was worse worse than than her her undisguised undisguised rage. rage. of of the the two, two, i i would would have have much much preferred preferred to to be be the the object object of of the the latter. latter. but, but, when when she she suffered suffered it it to to break break loose, loose, it it was was only only for for a a moment. moment. she she had had chained chained it it up up again, again, and and however however it it might might tear tear her her within, within, she she subdued subdued it it to to herself. herself. 'i 'i came came here, here, you pure pure fountain fountain of of love,' love,' she she said, said, 'to 'to see see -- -- as as i i began began by by telling telling you -- -- what what such such a a thing thing as as you was was like. like. i i was was curious. curious. i i am am satisfied. satisfied. also also to to tell tell you, that that you had had best best seek seek that that home home of of yours, yours, with with all all speed, speed, and and hide hide your your head head among among those those excellent excellent people people who who are are expecting expecting you, and and whom whom your your money money will will console. console. when when it's it's all all gone, gone, you can can believe, believe, and and trust, trust, and and love love again, again, you know! know! i i thought thought you a a broken broken toy toy that that had had lasted lasted its its time; time; a a worthless worthless spangle spangle that that was was tarnished, tarnished, and and thrown thrown away. away. but, but, finding finding you true true gold, gold, a a very very lady, lady, and and an an ill-used ill-used innocent, innocent, with with a a fresh fresh heart heart full full of of love love and and trustfulness trustfulness -- -- which which you look look like, like, and and is is quite quite consistent consistent with with your your story! story! -- -- i i have have something something more more to to say. say. attend attend to to it; it; for for what what i i say say i'll i'll do. do. do do you hear hear me, me, you fairy fairy spirit? spirit? what what i i say, say, i i mean mean to to do!' do!' her her rage rage got got the the better better of of her her again, again, for for a a moment; moment; but but it it passed passed over over her her face face like like a a spasm, spasm, and and left left her her smiling. smiling. 'hide 'hide yourself,' yourself,' she she pursued, pursued, 'if 'if not not at at home, home, somewhere. somewhere. let let it it be be somewhere somewhere beyond beyond reach; reach; in in some some obscure obscure life life -- -- or, or, better better still, still, in in some some obscure obscure death. death. i i wonder, wonder, if if your your loving loving heart heart will will not not break, break, you have have found found no no way way of of helping helping it it to to be be still! still! i i have have heard heard of of such such means means sometimes. sometimes. i i believe believe they they may may be be easily easily found.' found.' a a low low crying, crying, on on the the part part of of emily, emily, interrupted interrupted her her here. here. she she stopped, stopped, and and listened listened to to it it as as if if it it were were music. music. 'i 'i am am of of a a strange strange nature, nature, perhaps,' perhaps,' rosa rosa dartle dartle went went on; on; 'but 'but i i can't can't breathe breathe freely freely in in the the air air you breathe. breathe. i i find find it it sickly. sickly. therefore, therefore, i i will will have have it it cleared; cleared; i i will will have have it it purified purified of of you. if if you live live here here tomorrow, tomorrow, i'll i'll have have your your story story and and your your character character proclaimed proclaimed on on the the common common stair. stair. there there are are decent decent women women in in the the house, house, i i am am told; told; and and it it is is a a pity pity such such a a light light as as you should should be be among among them, them, and and concealed. concealed. if, if, leaving leaving here, here, you seek seek any any refuge refuge in in this this town town in in any any character character but but your your true true one one (which (which you are are welcome welcome to to bear, bear, without without molestation molestation from from me), me), the the same same service service shall shall be be done done you, if if i i hear hear of of your your retreat. retreat. being being assisted assisted by by a a gentleman gentleman who who not not long long ago ago aspired aspired to to the the favour favour of of your your hand, hand, i i am am sanguine sanguine as as to to that.' that.' would would he he never, never, never never come? come? how how long long was was i i to to bear bear this? this? how how long long could could i i bear bear it? it? 'oh 'oh me, me, oh oh me!' me!' exclaimed exclaimed the the wretched wretched emily, emily, in in a a tone tone that that might might have have touched touched the the hardest hardest heart, heart, i i should should have have thought; thought; but but there there was was no no relenting relenting in in rosa rosa dartle's dartle's smile. smile. 'what, 'what, what, what, shall shall i i do!' do!' 'do?' 'do?' returned returned the the other. other. 'live 'live happy happy in in your your own own reflections! reflections! consecrate consecrate your your existence existence to to the the recollection recollection of of james james steerforth's steerforth's tenderness tenderness -- -- he he would would have have made made you his his serving-man's serving-man's wife, wife, would would he he not? not? -- -- -or -or to to feeling feeling grateful grateful to to the the upright upright and and deserving deserving creature creature who who would would have have taken taken you as as his his gift. gift. or, or, if if those those proud proud remembrances, remembrances, and and the the consciousness consciousness of of your your own own virtues, virtues, and and the the honourable honourable position position to to which which they they have have raised raised you in in the the eyes eyes of of everything everything that that wears wears the the human human shape, shape, will will not not sustain sustain you, marry marry that that good good man, man, and and be be happy happy in in his his condescension. condescension. if if this this will will not not do do either, either, die! die! there there are are doorways doorways and and dust-heaps dust-heaps for for such such deaths, deaths, and and such such despair despair -- -- find find one, one, and and take take your your flight flight to to heaven!' heaven!' i i heard heard a a distant distant foot foot upon upon the the stairs. stairs. i i knew knew it, it, i i was was certain. certain. it it was was his, his, thank thank god! god! she she moved moved slowly slowly from from before before the the door door when when she she said said this, this, and and passed passed out out of of my my sight. sight. 'but 'but mark!' mark!' she she added, added, slowly slowly and and sternly, sternly, opening opening the the other other door door to to go go away, away, 'i 'i am am resolved, resolved, for for reasons reasons that that i i have have and and hatreds hatreds that that i i entertain, entertain, to to cast cast you out, out, unless unless you withdraw withdraw from from my my reach reach altogether, altogether, or or drop drop your your pretty pretty mask. mask. this this is is what what i i had had to to say; say; and and what what i i say, say, i i mean mean to to do!' do!' the the foot foot upon upon the the stairs stairs came came nearer nearer -- -- nearer nearer -- -- passed passed her her as as she she went went down down -- -- rushed rushed into into the the room! room! 'uncle!' 'uncle!' a a fearful fearful cry cry followed followed the the word. word. i i paused paused a a moment, moment, and and looking looking in, in, saw saw him him supporting supporting her her insensible insensible figure figure in in his his arms. arms. he he gazed gazed for for a a few few seconds seconds in in the the face; face; then then stooped stooped to to kiss kiss it it -- -- oh, oh, how how tenderly! tenderly! -- -- and and drew drew a a handkerchief handkerchief before before it. it. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' he he said, said, in in a a low low tremulous tremulous voice, voice, when when it it was was covered, covered, 'i 'i thank thank my my heav'nly heav'nly father father as as my my dream's dream's come come true! true! i i thank thank him him hearty hearty for for having having guided guided of of me, me, in in his his own own ways, ways, to to my my darling!' darling!' with with those those words words he he took took her her up up in in his his arms; arms; and, and, with with the the veiled veiled face face lying lying on on his his bosom, bosom, and and addressed addressed towards towards his his own, own, carried carried her, her, motionless motionless and and unconscious, unconscious, down down the the stairs. stairs. chapter chapter 51. 51. the the beginning beginning of of a a longer longer journey journey it it was was yet yet early early in in the the morning morning of of the the following following day, day, when, when, as as i i was was walking walking in in my my garden garden with with my my aunt aunt (who (who took took little little other other exercise exercise now, now, being being so so much much in in attendance attendance on on my my dear dear dora), dora), i i was was told told that that mr. mr. peggotty peggotty desired desired to to speak speak with with me. me. he he came came into into the the garden garden to to meet meet me me half-way, half-way, on on my my going going towards towards the the gate; gate; and and bared bared his his head, head, as as it it was was always always his his custom custom to to do do when when he he saw saw my my aunt, aunt, for for whom whom he he had had a a high high respect. respect. i i had had been been telling telling her her all all that that had had happened happened overnight. overnight. without without saying saying a a word, word, she she walked walked up up with with a a cordial cordial face, face, shook shook hands hands with with him, him, and and patted patted him him on on the the arm. arm. it it was was so so expressively expressively done, done, that that she she had had no no need need to to say say a a word. word. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty understood understood her her quite quite as as well well as as if if she she had had said said a a thousand. thousand. 'i'll 'i'll go go in in now, now, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and look look after after little little blossom, blossom, who who will will be be getting getting up up presently.' presently.' 'not 'not along along of of my my being being heer, heer, ma'am, ma'am, i i hope?' hope?' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'unless 'unless my my wits wits is is gone gone a a bahd's bahd's neezing' neezing' -- -- by by which which mr. mr. peggotty peggotty meant meant to to say, say, bird's-nesting bird's-nesting -- -- 'this 'this morning, morning, 'tis 'tis along along of of me me as as you're you're a-going a-going to to quit quit us?' us?' 'you have have something something to to say, say, my my good good friend,' friend,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and will will do do better better without without me.' me.' 'by 'by your your leave, leave, ma'am,' ma'am,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i should should take take it it kind, kind, pervising pervising you doen't doen't mind mind my my clicketten, clicketten, if if you'd you'd bide bide heer.' heer.' 'would 'would you?' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with short short good-nature. good-nature. 'then 'then i i am am sure sure i i will!' will!' so, so, she she drew drew her her arm arm through through mr. mr. peggotty's, peggotty's, and and walked walked with with him him to to a a leafy leafy little little summer-house summer-house there there was was at at the the bottom bottom of of the the garden, garden, where where she she sat sat down down on on a a bench, bench, and and i i beside beside her. her. there there was was a a seat seat for for mr. mr. peggotty peggotty too, too, but but he he preferred preferred to to stand, stand, leaning leaning his his hand hand on on the the small small rustic rustic table. table. as as he he stood, stood, looking looking at at his his cap cap for for a a little little while while before before beginning beginning to to speak, speak, i i could could not not help help observing observing what what power power and and force force of of character character his his sinewy sinewy hand hand expressed, expressed, and and what what a a good good and and trusty trusty companion companion it it was was to to his his honest honest brow brow and and iron-grey iron-grey hair. hair. 'i 'i took took my my dear dear child child away away last last night,' night,' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty began, began, as as he he raised raised his his eyes eyes to to ours, ours, 'to 'to my my lodging, lodging, wheer wheer i i have have a a long long time time been been expecting expecting of of her her and and preparing preparing fur fur her. her. it it was was hours hours afore afore she she knowed knowed me me right; right; and and when when she she did, did, she she kneeled kneeled down down at at my my feet, feet, and and kiender kiender said said to to me, me, as as if if it it was was her her prayers, prayers, how how it it all all come come to to be. be. you may may believe believe me, me, when when i i heerd heerd her her voice, voice, as as i i had had heerd heerd at at home home so so playful playful -- -- and and see see her her humbled, humbled, as as it it might might be be in in the the dust dust our our saviour saviour wrote wrote in in with with his his blessed blessed hand hand -- -- i i felt felt a a wownd wownd go go to to my my 'art, 'art, in in the the midst midst of of all all its its thankfulness.' thankfulness.' he he drew drew his his sleeve sleeve across across his his face, face, without without any any pretence pretence of of concealing concealing why; why; and and then then cleared cleared his his voice. voice. 'it 'it warn't warn't for for long long as as i i felt felt that; that; for for she she was was found. found. i i had had on'y on'y to to think think as as she she was was found, found, and and it it was was gone. gone. i i doen't doen't know know why why i i do do so so much much as as mention mention of of it it now, now, i'm i'm sure. sure. i i didn't didn't have have it it in in my my mind mind a a minute minute ago, ago, to to say say a a word word about about myself; myself; but but it it come come up up so so nat'ral, nat'ral, that that i i yielded yielded to to it it afore afore i i was was aweer.' aweer.' 'you are are a a self-denying self-denying soul,' soul,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and will will have have your your reward.' reward.' mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with the the shadows shadows of of the the leaves leaves playing playing athwart athwart his his face, face, made made a a surprised surprised inclination inclination of of the the head head towards towards my my aunt, aunt, as as an an acknowledgement acknowledgement of of her her good good opinion; opinion; then then took took up up the the thread thread he he had had relinquished. relinquished. 'when 'when my my em'ly em'ly took took flight,' flight,' he he said, said, in in stern stern wrath wrath for for the the moment, moment, 'from 'from the the house house wheer wheer she she was was made made a a prisoner prisoner by by that that theer theer spotted spotted snake snake as as mas'r mas'r davy davy see, see, -- -- and and his his story's story's trew, trew, and and may may god god confound confound him! him! -- -- she she took took flight flight in in the the night. night. it it was was a a dark dark night, night, with with a a many many stars stars a-shining. a-shining. she she was was wild. wild. she she ran ran along along the the sea sea beach, beach, believing believing the the old old boat boat was was theer; theer; and and calling calling out out to to us us to to turn turn away away our our faces, faces, for for she she was was a-coming a-coming by. by. she she heerd heerd herself herself a-crying a-crying out, out, like like as as if if it it was was another another person; person; and and cut cut herself herself on on them them sharp-pinted sharp-pinted stones stones and and rocks, rocks, and and felt felt it it no no more more than than if if she she had had been been rock rock herself. herself. ever ever so so fur fur she she run, run, and and there there was was fire fire afore afore her her eyes, eyes, and and roarings roarings in in her her ears. ears. of of a a sudden sudden -- -- or or so so she she thowt, thowt, you unnerstand unnerstand -- -- the the day day broke, broke, wet wet and and windy, windy, and and she she was was lying lying b'low b'low a a heap heap of of stone stone upon upon the the shore, shore, and and a a woman woman was was a-speaking a-speaking to to her, her, saying, saying, in in the the language language of of that that country, country, what what was was it it as as had had gone gone so so much much amiss?' amiss?' he he saw saw everything everything he he related. related. it it passed passed before before him, him, as as he he spoke, spoke, so so vividly, vividly, that, that, in in the the intensity intensity of of his his earnestness, earnestness, he he presented presented what what he he described described to to me, me, with with greater greater distinctness distinctness than than i i can can express. express. i i can can hardly hardly believe, believe, writing writing now now long long afterwards, afterwards, but but that that i i was was actually actually present present in in these these scenes; scenes; they they are are impressed impressed upon upon me me with with such such an an astonishing astonishing air air of of fidelity. fidelity. 'as 'as em'ly's em'ly's eyes eyes -- -- which which was was heavy heavy -- -- see see this this woman woman better,' better,' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty went went on, on, 'she 'she know'd know'd as as she she was was one one of of them them as as she she had had often often talked talked to to on on the the beach. beach. fur, fur, though though she she had had run run (as (as i i have have said) said) ever ever so so fur fur in in the the night, night, she she had had oftentimes oftentimes wandered wandered long long ways, ways, partly partly afoot, afoot, partly partly in in boats boats and and carriages, carriages, and and know'd know'd all all that that country, country, 'long 'long the the coast, coast, miles miles and and miles. miles. she she hadn't hadn't no no children children of of her her own, own, this this woman, woman, being being a a young young wife; wife; but but she she was was a-looking a-looking to to have have one one afore afore long. long. and and may may my my prayers prayers go go up up to to heaven heaven that that 'twill 'twill be be a a happiness happiness to to her, her, and and a a comfort, comfort, and and a a honour, honour, all all her her life! life! may may it it love love her her and and be be dootiful dootiful to to her, her, in in her her old old age; age; helpful helpful of of her her at at the the last; last; a a angel angel to to her her heer, heer, and and heerafter!' heerafter!' 'amen!' 'amen!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'she 'she had had been been summat summat timorous timorous and and down,' down,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, and and had had sat, sat, at at first, first, a a little little way way off, off, at at her her spinning, spinning, or or such such work work as as it it was, was, when when em'ly em'ly talked talked to to the the children. children. but but em'ly em'ly had had took took notice notice of of her, her, and and had had gone gone and and spoke spoke to to her; her; and and as as the the young young woman woman was was partial partial to to the the children children herself, herself, they they had had soon soon made made friends. friends. sermuchser, sermuchser, that that when when em'ly em'ly went went that that way, way, she she always always giv giv em'ly em'ly flowers. flowers. this this was was her her as as now now asked asked what what it it was was that that had had gone gone so so much much amiss. amiss. em'ly em'ly told told her, her, and and she she -- -- took took her her home. home. she she did did indeed. indeed. she she took took her her home,' home,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, covering covering his his face. face. he he was was more more affected affected by by this this act act of of kindness, kindness, than than i i had had ever ever seen seen him him affected affected by by anything anything since since the the night night she she went went away. away. my my aunt aunt and and i i did did not not attempt attempt to to disturb disturb him. him. 'it 'it was was a a little little cottage, cottage, you may may suppose,' suppose,' he he said, said, presently, presently, 'but 'but she she found found space space for for em'ly em'ly in in it, it, -- -- her her husband husband was was away away at at sea, sea, -- -- and and she she kep kep it it secret, secret, and and prevailed prevailed upon upon such such neighbours neighbours as as she she had had (they (they was was not not many many near) near) to to keep keep it it secret secret too. too. em'ly em'ly was was took took bad bad with with fever, fever, and, and, what what is is very very strange strange to to me me is, is, -- -- maybe maybe 'tis 'tis not not so so strange strange to to scholars, scholars, -- -- the the language language of of that that country country went went out out of of her her head, head, and and she she could could only only speak speak her her own, own, that that no no one one unnerstood. unnerstood. she she recollects, recollects, as as if if she she had had dreamed dreamed it, it, that that she she lay lay there there always always a-talking a-talking her her own own tongue, tongue, always always believing believing as as the the old old boat boat was was round round the the next next pint pint in in the the bay, bay, and and begging begging and and imploring imploring of of 'em 'em to to send send theer theer and and tell tell how how she she was was dying, dying, and and bring bring back back a a message message of of forgiveness, forgiveness, if if it it was was on'y on'y a a wured. wured. a'most a'most the the whole whole time, time, she she thowt, thowt, -- -- now, now, that that him him as as i i made made mention mention on on just just now now was was lurking lurking for for her her unnerneath unnerneath the the winder; winder; now now that that him him as as had had brought brought her her to to this this was was in in the the room, room, -- -- and and cried cried to to the the good good young young woman woman not not to to give give her her up, up, and and know'd, know'd, at at the the same same time, time, that that she she couldn't couldn't unnerstand, unnerstand, and and dreaded dreaded that that she she must must be be took took away. away. likewise likewise the the fire fire was was afore afore her her eyes, eyes, and and the the roarings roarings in in her her ears; ears; and and theer theer was was no no today, today, nor nor yesterday, yesterday, nor nor yet yet tomorrow; tomorrow; but but everything everything in in her her life life as as ever ever had had been, been, or or as as ever ever could could be, be, and and everything everything as as never never had had been, been, and and as as never never could could be, be, was was a a crowding crowding on on her her all all at at once, once, and and nothing nothing clear clear nor nor welcome, welcome, and and yet yet she she sang sang and and laughed laughed about about it! it! how how long long this this lasted, lasted, i i doen't doen't know; know; but but then then theer theer come come a a sleep; sleep; and and in in that that sleep, sleep, from from being being a a many many times times stronger stronger than than her her own own self, self, she she fell fell into into the the weakness weakness of of the the littlest littlest child.' child.' here here he he stopped, stopped, as as if if for for relief relief from from the the terrors terrors of of his his own own description. description. after after being being silent silent for for a a few few moments, moments, he he pursued pursued his his story. story. 'it 'it was was a a pleasant pleasant arternoon arternoon when when she she awoke; awoke; and and so so quiet, quiet, that that there there warn't warn't a a sound sound but but the the rippling rippling of of that that blue blue sea sea without without a a tide, tide, upon upon the the shore. shore. it it was was her her belief, belief, at at first, first, that that she she was was at at home home upon upon a a sunday sunday morning; morning; but but the the vine vine leaves leaves as as she she see see at at the the winder, winder, and and the the hills hills beyond, beyond, warn't warn't home, home, and and contradicted contradicted of of her. her. then, then, come come in in her her friend friend to to watch watch alongside alongside of of her her bed; bed; and and then then she she know'd know'd as as the the old old boat boat warn't warn't round round that that next next pint pint in in the the bay bay no no more, more, but but was was fur fur off; off; and and know'd know'd where where she she was, was, and and why; why; and and broke broke out out a-crying a-crying on on that that good good young young woman's woman's bosom, bosom, wheer wheer i i hope hope her her baby baby is is a-lying a-lying now, now, a-cheering a-cheering of of her her with with its its pretty pretty eyes!' eyes!' he he could could not not speak speak of of this this good good friend friend of of emily's emily's without without a a flow flow of of tears. tears. it it was was in in vain vain to to try. try. he he broke broke down down again, again, endeavouring endeavouring to to bless bless her! her! 'that 'that done done my my em'ly em'ly good,' good,' he he resumed, resumed, after after such such emotion emotion as as i i could could not not behold behold without without sharing sharing in; in; and and as as to to my my aunt, aunt, she she wept wept with with all all her her heart; heart; 'that 'that done done em'ly em'ly good, good, and and she she begun begun to to mend. mend. but, but, the the language language of of that that country country was was quite quite gone gone from from her, her, and and she she was was forced forced to to make make signs. signs. so so she she went went on, on, getting getting better better from from day day to to day, day, slow, slow, but but sure, sure, and and trying trying to to learn learn the the names names of of common common things things -- -- names names as as she she seemed seemed never never to to have have heerd heerd in in all all her her life life -- -- till till one one evening evening come, come, when when she she was was a-setting a-setting at at her her window, window, looking looking at at a a little little girl girl at at play play upon upon the the beach. beach. and and of of a a sudden sudden this this child child held held out out her her hand, hand, and and said, said, what what would would be be in in english, english, "fisherman's "fisherman's daughter, daughter, here's here's a a shell!" shell!" -- -- for for you are are to to unnerstand unnerstand that that they they used used at at first first to to call call her her "pretty "pretty lady", lady", as as the the general general way way in in that that country country is, is, and and that that she she had had taught taught 'em 'em to to call call her her "fisherman's "fisherman's daughter" daughter" instead. instead. the the child child says says of of a a sudden, sudden, "fisherman's "fisherman's daughter, daughter, here's here's a a shell!" shell!" then then em'ly em'ly unnerstands unnerstands her; her; and and she she answers, answers, bursting bursting out out a-crying; a-crying; and and it it all all comes comes back! back! 'when 'when em'ly em'ly got got strong strong again,' again,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, after after another another short short interval interval of of silence, silence, 'she 'she cast cast about about to to leave leave that that good good young young creetur, creetur, and and get get to to her her own own country. country. the the husband husband was was come come home, home, then; then; and and the the two two together together put put her her aboard aboard a a small small trader trader bound bound to to leghorn, leghorn, and and from from that that to to france. france. she she had had a a little little money, money, but but it it was was less less than than little little as as they they would would take take for for all all they they done. done. i'm i'm a'most a'most glad glad on on it, it, though though they they was was so so poor! poor! what what they they done, done, is is laid laid up up wheer wheer neither neither moth moth or or rust rust doth doth corrupt, corrupt, and and wheer wheer thieves thieves do do not not break break through through nor nor steal. steal. mas'r mas'r davy, davy, it'll it'll outlast outlast all all the the treasure treasure in in the the wureld. wureld. 'em'ly 'em'ly got got to to france, france, and and took took service service to to wait wait on on travelling travelling ladies ladies at at a a inn inn in in the the port. port. theer, theer, theer theer come, come, one one day, day, that that snake. snake. -- -- let let him him never never come come nigh nigh me. me. i i doen't doen't know know what what hurt hurt i i might might do do him! him! -- -- soon soon as as she she see see him, him, without without him him seeing seeing her, her, all all her her fear fear and and wildness wildness returned returned upon upon her, her, and and she she fled fled afore afore the the very very breath breath he he draw'd. draw'd. she she come come to to england, england, and and was was set set ashore ashore at at dover. dover. 'i 'i doen't doen't know,' know,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'for 'for sure, sure, when when her her 'art 'art begun begun to to fail fail her; her; but but all all the the way way to to england england she she had had thowt thowt to to come come to to her her dear dear home. home. soon soon as as she she got got to to england england she she turned turned her her face face tow'rds tow'rds it. it. but, but, fear fear of of not not being being forgiv, forgiv, fear fear of of being being pinted pinted at, at, fear fear of of some some of of us us being being dead dead along along of of her, her, fear fear of of many many things, things, turned turned her her from from it, it, kiender kiender by by force, force, upon upon the the road: road: "uncle, "uncle, uncle," uncle," she she says says to to me, me, "the "the fear fear of of not not being being worthy worthy to to do do what what my my torn torn and and bleeding bleeding breast breast so so longed longed to to do, do, was was the the most most fright'ning fright'ning fear fear of of all! all! i i turned turned back, back, when when my my 'art 'art was was full full of of prayers prayers that that i i might might crawl crawl to to the the old old door-step, door-step, in in the the night, night, kiss kiss it, it, lay lay my my wicked wicked face face upon upon it, it, and and theer theer be be found found dead dead in in the the morning." morning." 'she 'she come,' come,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, dropping dropping his his voice voice to to an an awe-stricken awe-stricken whisper, whisper, 'to 'to london. london. she she -- -- as as had had never never seen seen it it in in her her life life -- -- alone alone -- -- without without a a penny penny -- -- young young -- -- so so pretty pretty -- -- come come to to london. london. a'most a'most the the moment moment as as she she lighted lighted heer, heer, all all so so desolate, desolate, she she found found (as (as she she believed) believed) a a friend; friend; a a decent decent woman woman as as spoke spoke to to her her about about the the needle-work needle-work as as she she had had been been brought brought up up to to do, do, about about finding finding plenty plenty of of it it fur fur her, her, about about a a lodging lodging fur fur the the night, night, and and making making secret secret inquiration inquiration concerning concerning of of me me and and all all at at home, home, tomorrow. tomorrow. when when my my child,' child,' he he said said aloud, aloud, and and with with an an energy energy of of gratitude gratitude that that shook shook him him from from head head to to foot, foot, 'stood 'stood upon upon the the brink brink of of more more than than i i can can say say or or think think on on -- -- martha, martha, trew trew to to her her promise, promise, saved saved her.' her.' i i could could not not repress repress a a cry cry of of joy. joy. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy!' davy!' said said he, he, gripping gripping my my hand hand in in that that strong strong hand hand of of his, his, 'it 'it was was you as as first first made made mention mention of of her her to to me. me. i i thankee, thankee, sir! sir! she she was was arnest. arnest. she she had had know'd know'd of of her her bitter bitter knowledge knowledge wheer wheer to to watch watch and and what what to to do. do. she she had had done done it. it. and and the the lord lord was was above above all! all! she she come, come, white white and and hurried, hurried, upon upon em'ly em'ly in in her her sleep. sleep. she she says says to to her, her, "rise "rise up up from from worse worse than than death, death, and and come come with with me!" me!" them them belonging belonging to to the the house house would would have have stopped stopped her, her, but but they they might might as as soon soon have have stopped stopped the the sea. sea. "stand "stand away away from from me," me," she she says, says, "i "i am am a a ghost ghost that that calls calls her her from from beside beside her her open open grave!" grave!" she she told told em'ly em'ly she she had had seen seen me, me, and and know'd know'd i i loved loved her, her, and and forgive forgive her. her. she she wrapped wrapped her, her, hasty, hasty, in in her her clothes. clothes. she she took took her, her, faint faint and and trembling, trembling, on on her her arm. arm. she she heeded heeded no no more more what what they they said, said, than than if if she she had had had had no no ears. ears. she she walked walked among among 'em 'em with with my my child, child, minding minding only only her; her; and and brought brought her her safe safe out, out, in in the the dead dead of of the the night, night, from from that that black black pit pit of of ruin! ruin! 'she 'she attended attended on on em'ly,' em'ly,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, who who had had released released my my hand, hand, and and put put his his own own hand hand on on his his heaving heaving chest; chest; 'she 'she attended attended to to my my em'ly, em'ly, lying lying wearied wearied out, out, and and wandering wandering betwixt betwixt whiles, whiles, till till late late next next day. day. then then she she went went in in search search of of me; me; then then in in search search of of you, mas'r mas'r davy. davy. she she didn't didn't tell tell em'ly em'ly what what she she come come out out fur, fur, lest lest her her 'art 'art should should fail, fail, and and she she should should think think of of hiding hiding of of herself. herself. how how the the cruel cruel lady lady know'd know'd of of her her being being theer, theer, i i can't can't say. say. whether whether him him as as i i have have spoke spoke so so much much of, of, chanced chanced to to see see 'em 'em going going theer, theer, or or whether whether (which (which is is most most like, like, to to my my thinking) thinking) he he had had heerd heerd it it from from the the woman, woman, i i doen't doen't greatly greatly ask ask myself. myself. my my niece niece is is found. found. 'all 'all night night long,' long,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'we 'we have have been been together, together, em'ly em'ly and and me. me. 'tis 'tis little little (considering (considering the the time) time) as as she she has has said, said, in in wureds, wureds, through through them them broken-hearted broken-hearted tears; tears; 'tis 'tis less less as as i i have have seen seen of of her her dear dear face, face, as as grow'd grow'd into into a a woman's woman's at at my my hearth. hearth. but, but, all all night night long, long, her her arms arms has has been been about about my my neck; neck; and and her her head head has has laid laid heer; heer; and and we we knows knows full full well, well, as as we we can can put put our our trust trust in in one one another, another, ever ever more.' more.' he he ceased ceased to to speak, speak, and and his his hand hand upon upon the the table table rested rested there there in in perfect perfect repose, repose, with with a a resolution resolution in in it it that that might might have have conquered conquered lions. lions. 'it 'it was was a a gleam gleam of of light light upon upon me, me, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, drying drying her her eyes, eyes, 'when 'when i i formed formed the the resolution resolution of of being being godmother godmother to to your your sister sister betsey betsey trotwood, trotwood, who who disappointed disappointed me; me; but, but, next next to to that, that, hardly hardly anything anything would would have have given given me me greater greater pleasure, pleasure, than than to to be be godmother godmother to to that that good good young young creature's creature's baby!' baby!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty nodded nodded his his understanding understanding of of my my aunt's aunt's feelings, feelings, but but could could not not trust trust himself himself with with any any verbal verbal reference reference to to the the subject subject of of her her commendation. commendation. we we all all remained remained silent, silent, and and occupied occupied with with our our own own reflections reflections (my (my aunt aunt drying drying her her eyes, eyes, and and now now sobbing sobbing convulsively, convulsively, and and now now laughing laughing and and calling calling herself herself a a fool); fool); until until i i spoke. spoke. 'you have have quite quite made made up up your your mind,' mind,' said said i i to to mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'as 'as to to the the future, future, good good friend? friend? i i need need scarcely scarcely ask ask you.' 'quite, 'quite, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he returned; returned; 'and 'and told told em'ly. em'ly. theer's theer's mighty mighty countries, countries, fur fur from from heer. heer. our our future future life life lays lays over over the the sea.' sea.' 'they 'they will will emigrate emigrate together, together, aunt,' aunt,' said said i. i. 'yes!' 'yes!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a hopeful hopeful smile. smile. 'no 'no one one can't can't reproach reproach my my darling darling in in australia. australia. we we will will begin begin a a new new life life over over theer!' theer!' i i asked asked him him if if he he yet yet proposed proposed to to himself himself any any time time for for going going away. away. 'i 'i was was down down at at the the docks docks early early this this morning, morning, sir,' sir,' he he returned, returned, 'to 'to get get information information concerning concerning of of them them ships. ships. in in about about six six weeks weeks or or two two months months from from now, now, there'll there'll be be one one sailing sailing -- -- i i see see her her this this morning morning -- -- went went aboard aboard -- -- and and we we shall shall take take our our passage passage in in her.' her.' 'quite 'quite alone?' alone?' i i asked. asked. 'aye, 'aye, mas'r mas'r davy!' davy!' he he returned. returned. 'my 'my sister, sister, you see, see, she's she's that that fond fond of of you and and yourn, yourn, and and that that accustomed accustomed to to think think on'y on'y of of her her own own country, country, that that it it wouldn't wouldn't be be hardly hardly fair fair to to let let her her go. go. besides besides which, which, theer's theer's one one she she has has in in charge, charge, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, as as doen't doen't ought ought to to be be forgot.' forgot.' 'poor 'poor ham!' ham!' said said i. i. 'my 'my good good sister sister takes takes care care of of his his house, house, you see, see, ma'am, ma'am, and and he he takes takes kindly kindly to to her,' her,' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty explained explained for for my my aunt's aunt's better better information. information. 'he'll 'he'll set set and and talk talk to to her, her, with with a a calm calm spirit, spirit, wen wen it's it's like like he he couldn't couldn't bring bring himself himself to to open open his his lips lips to to another. another. poor poor fellow!' fellow!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'theer's 'theer's not not so so much much left left him, him, that that he he could could spare spare the the little little as as he he has!' has!' 'and 'and mrs. mrs. gummidge?' gummidge?' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, i've i've had had a a mort mort of of consideration, consideration, i i do do tell tell you,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a perplexed perplexed look look which which gradually gradually cleared cleared as as he he went went on, on, 'concerning 'concerning of of missis missis gummidge. gummidge. you see, see, wen wen missis missis gummidge gummidge falls falls a-thinking a-thinking of of the the old old 'un, 'un, she she an't an't what what you may may call call good good company. company. betwixt betwixt you and and me, me, mas'r mas'r davy davy -- -- and and you, ma'am ma'am -- -- wen wen mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge takes takes to to wimicking,' wimicking,' -- -- our our old old country country word word for for crying, crying, -- -- 'she's 'she's liable liable to to be be considered considered to to be, be, by by them them as as didn't didn't know know the the old old 'un, 'un, peevish-like. peevish-like. now now i i did did know know the the old old 'un,' 'un,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and i i know'd know'd his his merits, merits, so so i i unnerstan' unnerstan' her; her; but but 'tan't 'tan't entirely entirely so, so, you see, see, with with others others -- -- nat'rally nat'rally can't can't be!' be!' my my aunt aunt and and i i both both acquiesced. acquiesced. 'wheerby,' 'wheerby,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'my 'my sister sister might might -- -- i i doen't doen't say say she she would, would, but but might might -- -- find find missis missis gummidge gummidge give give her her a a leetle leetle trouble trouble now-and-again. now-and-again. theerfur theerfur 'tan't 'tan't my my intentions intentions to to moor moor missis missis gummidge gummidge 'long 'long with with them, them, but but to to find find a a beein' beein' fur fur her her wheer wheer she she can can fisherate fisherate for for herself.' herself.' (a (a beein' beein' signifies, signifies, in in that that dialect, dialect, a a home, home, and and to to fisherate fisherate is is to to provide.) provide.) 'fur 'fur which which purpose,' purpose,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'i 'i means means to to make make her her a a 'lowance 'lowance afore afore i i go, go, as'll as'll leave leave her her pretty pretty comfort'ble. comfort'ble. she's she's the the faithfullest faithfullest of of creeturs. creeturs. 'tan't 'tan't to to be be expected, expected, of of course, course, at at her her time time of of life, life, and and being being lone lone and and lorn, lorn, as as the the good good old old mawther mawther is is to to be be knocked knocked about about aboardship, aboardship, and and in in the the woods woods and and wilds wilds of of a a new new and and fur-away fur-away country. country. so so that's that's what what i'm i'm a-going a-going to to do do with with her.' her.' he he forgot forgot nobody. nobody. he he thought thought of of everybody's everybody's claims claims and and strivings, strivings, but but his his own. own. 'em'ly,' 'em'ly,' he he continued, continued, 'will 'will keep keep along along with with me me -- -- poor poor child, child, she's she's sore sore in in need need of of peace peace and and rest! rest! -- -- until until such such time time as as we we goes goes upon upon our our voyage. voyage. she'll she'll work work at at them them clothes, clothes, as as must must be be made; made; and and i i hope hope her her troubles troubles will will begin begin to to seem seem longer longer ago ago than than they they was, was, wen wen she she finds finds herself herself once once more more by by her her rough rough but but loving loving uncle.' uncle.' my my aunt aunt nodded nodded confirmation confirmation of of this this hope, hope, and and imparted imparted great great satisfaction satisfaction to to mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'theer's 'theer's one one thing thing furder, furder, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said he, he, putting putting his his hand hand in in his his breast-pocket, breast-pocket, and and gravely gravely taking taking out out the the little little paper paper bundle bundle i i had had seen seen before, before, which which he he unrolled unrolled on on the the table. table. 'theer's 'theer's these these here here banknotes banknotes -- -- fifty fifty pound, pound, and and ten. ten. to to them them i i wish wish to to add add the the money money as as she she come come away away with. with. i've i've asked asked her her about about that that (but (but not not saying saying why), why), and and have have added added of of it it up. up. i i an't an't a a scholar. scholar. would would you be be so so kind kind as as see see how how 'tis?' 'tis?' he he handed handed me, me, apologetically apologetically for for his his scholarship, scholarship, a a piece piece of of paper, paper, and and observed observed me me while while i i looked looked it it over. over. it it was was quite quite right. right. 'thankee, 'thankee, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, taking taking it it back. back. 'this 'this money, money, if if you doen't doen't see see objections, objections, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, i i shall shall put put up up jest jest afore afore i i go, go, in in a a cover cover directed directed to to him; him; and and put put that that up up in in another, another, directed directed to to his his mother. mother. i i shall shall tell tell her, her, in in no no more more wureds wureds than than i i speak speak to to you, what what it's it's the the price price on; on; and and that that i'm i'm gone, gone, and and past past receiving receiving of of it it back.' back.' i i told told him him that that i i thought thought it it would would be be right right to to do do so so -- -- that that i i was was thoroughly thoroughly convinced convinced it it would would be, be, since since he he felt felt it it to to be be right. right. 'i 'i said said that that theer theer was was on'y on'y one one thing thing furder,' furder,' he he proceeded proceeded with with a a grave grave smile, smile, when when he he had had made made up up his his little little bundle bundle again, again, and and put put it it in in his his pocket; pocket; 'but 'but theer theer was was two. two. i i warn't warn't sure sure in in my my mind, mind, wen wen i i come come out out this this morning, morning, as as i i could could go go and and break break to to ham, ham, of of my my own own self, self, what what had had so so thankfully thankfully happened. happened. so so i i writ writ a a letter letter while while i i was was out, out, and and put put it it in in the the post-office, post-office, telling telling of of 'em 'em how how all all was was as as 'tis; 'tis; and and that that i i should should come come down down tomorrow tomorrow to to unload unload my my mind mind of of what what little little needs needs a-doing a-doing of of down down theer, theer, and, and, most-like, most-like, take take my my farewell farewell leave leave of of yarmouth.' yarmouth.' 'and 'and do do you wish wish me me to to go go with with you?' said said i, i, seeing seeing that that he he left left something something unsaid. unsaid. 'if 'if you could could do do me me that that kind kind favour, favour, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he replied. replied. 'i 'i know know the the sight sight on on you would would cheer cheer 'em 'em up up a a bit.' bit.' my my little little dora dora being being in in good good spirits, spirits, and and very very desirous desirous that that i i should should go go -- -- as as i i found found on on talking talking it it over over with with her her -- -- i i readily readily pledged pledged myself myself to to accompany accompany him him in in accordance accordance with with his his wish. wish. next next morning, morning, consequently, consequently, we we were were on on the the yarmouth yarmouth coach, coach, and and again again travelling travelling over over the the old old ground. ground. as as we we passed passed along along the the familiar familiar street street at at night night -- -- mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, in in despite despite of of all all my my remonstrances, remonstrances, carrying carrying my my bag bag -- -- i i glanced glanced into into omer omer and and joram's joram's shop, shop, and and saw saw my my old old friend friend mr. mr. omer omer there, there, smoking smoking his his pipe. pipe. i i felt felt reluctant reluctant to to be be present, present, when when mr. mr. peggotty peggotty first first met met his his sister sister and and ham; ham; and and made made mr. mr. omer omer my my excuse excuse for for lingering lingering behind. behind. 'how 'how is is mr. mr. omer, omer, after after this this long long time?' time?' said said i, i, going going in. in. he he fanned fanned away away the the smoke smoke of of his his pipe, pipe, that that he he might might get get a a better better view view of of me, me, and and soon soon recognized recognized me me with with great great delight. delight. 'i 'i should should get get up, up, sir, sir, to to acknowledge acknowledge such such an an honour honour as as this this visit,' visit,' said said he, he, 'only 'only my my limbs limbs are are rather rather out out of of sorts, sorts, and and i i am am wheeled wheeled about. about. with with the the exception exception of of my my limbs limbs and and my my breath, breath, howsoever, howsoever, i i am am as as hearty hearty as as a a man man can can be, be, i'm i'm thankful thankful to to say.' say.' i i congratulated congratulated him him on on his his contented contented looks looks and and his his good good spirits, spirits, and and saw, saw, now, now, that that his his easy-chair easy-chair went went on on wheels. wheels. 'it's 'it's an an ingenious ingenious thing, thing, ain't ain't it?' it?' he he inquired, inquired, following following the the direction direction of of my my glance, glance, and and polishing polishing the the elbow elbow with with his his arm. arm. 'it 'it runs runs as as light light as as a a feather, feather, and and tracks tracks as as true true as as a a mail-coach. mail-coach. bless bless you, my my little little minnie minnie -- -- my my grand-daughter grand-daughter you know, know, minnie's minnie's child child -- -- puts puts her her little little strength strength against against the the back, back, gives gives it it a a shove, shove, and and away away we we go, go, as as clever clever and and merry merry as as ever ever you see see anything! anything! and and i i tell tell you what what -- -- it's it's a a most most uncommon uncommon chair chair to to smoke smoke a a pipe pipe in.' in.' i i never never saw saw such such a a good good old old fellow fellow to to make make the the best best of of a a thing, thing, and and find find out out the the enjoyment enjoyment of of it, it, as as mr. mr. omer. omer. he he was was as as radiant, radiant, as as if if his his chair, chair, his his asthma, asthma, and and the the failure failure of of his his limbs, limbs, were were the the various various branches branches of of a a great great invention invention for for enhancing enhancing the the luxury luxury of of a a pipe. pipe. 'i 'i see see more more of of the the world, world, i i can can assure assure you,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'in 'in this this chair, chair, than than ever ever i i see see out out of of it. it. you'd you'd be be surprised surprised at at the the number number of of people people that that looks looks in in of of a a day day to to have have a a chat. chat. you really really would! would! there's there's twice twice as as much much in in the the newspaper, newspaper, since since i've i've taken taken to to this this chair, chair, as as there there used used to to be. be. as as to to general general reading, reading, dear dear me, me, what what a a lot lot of of it it i i do do get get through! through! that's that's what what i i feel feel so so strong, strong, you know! know! if if it it had had been been my my eyes, eyes, what what should should i i have have done? done? if if it it had had been been my my ears, ears, what what should should i i have have done? done? being being my my limbs, limbs, what what does does it it signify? signify? why, why, my my limbs limbs only only made made my my breath breath shorter shorter when when i i used used 'em. 'em. and and now, now, if if i i want want to to go go out out into into the the street street or or down down to to the the sands, sands, i've i've only only got got to to call call dick, dick, joram's joram's youngest youngest 'prentice, 'prentice, and and away away i i go go in in my my own own carriage, carriage, like like the the lord lord mayor mayor of of london.' london.' he he half half suffocated suffocated himself himself with with laughing laughing here. here. 'lord 'lord bless bless you!' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, resuming resuming his his pipe, pipe, 'a 'a man man must must take take the the fat fat with with the the lean; lean; that's that's what what he he must must make make up up his his mind mind to, to, in in this this life. life. joram joram does does a a fine fine business. business. ex-cellent ex-cellent business!' business!' 'i 'i am am very very glad glad to to hear hear it,' it,' said said i. i. 'i 'i knew knew you would would be,' be,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'and 'and joram joram and and minnie minnie are are like like valentines. valentines. what what more more can can a a man man expect? expect? what's what's his his limbs limbs to to that!' that!' his his supreme supreme contempt contempt for for his his own own limbs, limbs, as as he he sat sat smoking, smoking, was was one one of of the the pleasantest pleasantest oddities oddities i i have have ever ever encountered. encountered. 'and 'and since since i've i've took took to to general general reading, reading, you've you've took took to to general general writing, writing, eh, eh, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, surveying surveying me me admiringly. admiringly. 'what 'what a a lovely lovely work work that that was was of of yours! yours! what what expressions expressions in in it! it! i i read read it it every every word word -- -- every every word. word. and and as as to to feeling feeling sleepy! sleepy! not not at at all!' all!' i i laughingly laughingly expressed expressed my my satisfaction, satisfaction, but but i i must must confess confess that that i i thought thought this this association association of of ideas ideas significant. significant. 'i 'i give give you my my word word and and honour, honour, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'that 'that when when i i lay lay that that book book upon upon the the table, table, and and look look at at it it outside; outside; compact compact in in three three separate separate and and indiwidual indiwidual wollumes wollumes -- -- one, one, two, two, three; three; i i am am as as proud proud as as punch punch to to think think that that i i once once had had the the honour honour of of being being connected connected with with your your family. family. and and dear dear me, me, it's it's a a long long time time ago, ago, now, now, ain't ain't it? it? over over at at blunderstone. blunderstone. with with a a pretty pretty little little party party laid laid along along with with the the other other party. party. and and you quite quite a a small small party party then, then, yourself. yourself. dear, dear, dear!' dear!' i i changed changed the the subject subject by by referring referring to to emily. emily. after after assuring assuring him him that that i i did did not not forget forget how how interested interested he he had had always always been been in in her, her, and and how how kindly kindly he he had had always always treated treated her, her, i i gave gave him him a a general general account account of of her her restoration restoration to to her her uncle uncle by by the the aid aid of of martha; martha; which which i i knew knew would would please please the the old old man. man. he he listened listened with with the the utmost utmost attention, attention, and and said, said, feelingly, feelingly, when when i i had had done: done: 'i 'i am am rejoiced rejoiced at at it, it, sir! sir! it's it's the the best best news news i i have have heard heard for for many many a a day. day. dear, dear, dear, dear, dear! dear! and and what's what's going going to to be be undertook undertook for for that that unfortunate unfortunate young young woman, woman, martha, martha, now?' now?' 'you touch touch a a point point that that my my thoughts thoughts have have been been dwelling dwelling on on since since yesterday,' yesterday,' said said i, i, 'but 'but on on which which i i can can give give you no no information information yet, yet, mr. mr. omer. omer. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty has has not not alluded alluded to to it, it, and and i i have have a a delicacy delicacy in in doing doing so. so. i i am am sure sure he he has has not not forgotten forgotten it. it. he he forgets forgets nothing nothing that that is is disinterested disinterested and and good.' good.' 'because 'because you know,' know,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, taking taking himself himself up, up, where where he he had had left left off, off, 'whatever 'whatever is is done, done, i i should should wish wish to to be be a a member member of. of. put put me me down down for for anything anything you may may consider consider right, right, and and let let me me know. know. i i never never could could think think the the girl girl all all bad, bad, and and i i am am glad glad to to find find she's she's not. not. so so will will my my daughter daughter minnie minnie be. be. young young women women are are contradictory contradictory creatures creatures in in some some things things -- -- her her mother mother was was just just the the same same as as her her -- -- but but their their hearts hearts are are soft soft and and kind. kind. it's it's all all show show with with minnie, minnie, about about martha. martha. why why she she should should consider consider it it necessary necessary to to make make any any show, show, i i don't don't undertake undertake to to tell tell you. but but it's it's all all show, show, bless bless you. she'd she'd do do her her any any kindness kindness in in private. private. so, so, put put me me down down for for whatever whatever you may may consider consider right, right, will will you be be so so good? good? and and drop drop me me a a line line where where to to forward forward it. it. dear dear me!' me!' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'when 'when a a man man is is drawing drawing on on to to a a time time of of life, life, where where the the two two ends ends of of life life meet; meet; when when he he finds finds himself, himself, however however hearty hearty he he is, is, being being wheeled wheeled about about for for the the second second time, time, in in a a speeches speeches of of go-cart; go-cart; he he should should be be over-rejoiced over-rejoiced to to do do a a kindness kindness if if he he can. can. he he wants wants plenty. plenty. and and i i don't don't speak speak of of myself, myself, particular,' particular,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, 'because, 'because, sir, sir, the the way way i i look look at at it it is, is, that that we we are are all all drawing drawing on on to to the the bottom bottom of of the the hill, hill, whatever whatever age age we we are, are, on on account account of of time time never never standing standing still still for for a a single single moment. moment. so so let let us us always always do do a a kindness, kindness, and and be be over-rejoiced. over-rejoiced. to to be be sure!' sure!' he he knocked knocked the the ashes ashes out out of of his his pipe, pipe, and and put put it it on on a a ledge ledge in in the the back back of of his his chair, chair, expressly expressly made made for for its its reception. reception. 'there's 'there's em'ly's em'ly's cousin, cousin, him him that that she she was was to to have have been been married married to,' to,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, rubbing rubbing his his hands hands feebly, feebly, 'as 'as fine fine a a fellow fellow as as there there is is in in yarmouth! yarmouth! he'll he'll come come and and talk talk or or read read to to me, me, in in the the evening, evening, for for an an hour hour together together sometimes. sometimes. that's that's a a kindness, kindness, i i should should call call it! it! all all his his life's life's a a kindness.' kindness.' 'i 'i am am going going to to see see him him now,' now,' said said i. i. 'are 'are you?' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'tell 'tell him him i i was was hearty, hearty, and and sent sent my my respects. respects. minnie minnie and and joram's joram's at at a a ball. ball. they they would would be be as as proud proud to to see see you as as i i am, am, if if they they was was at at home. home. minnie minnie won't won't hardly hardly go go out out at at all, all, you see, see, "on "on account account of of father", father", as as she she says. says. so so i i swore swore tonight, tonight, that that if if she she didn't didn't go, go, i'd i'd go go to to bed bed at at six. six. in in consequence consequence of of which,' which,' mr. mr. omer omer shook shook himself himself and and his his chair chair with with laughter laughter at at the the success success of of his his device, device, 'she 'she and and joram's joram's at at a a ball.' ball.' i i shook shook hands hands with with him, him, and and wished wished him him good good night. night. 'half 'half a a minute, minute, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer. omer. 'if 'if you was was to to go go without without seeing seeing my my little little elephant, elephant, you'd you'd lose lose the the best best of of sights. sights. you never never see see such such a a sight! sight! minnie!' minnie!' a a musical musical little little voice voice answered, answered, from from somewhere somewhere upstairs, upstairs, 'i 'i am am coming, coming, grandfather!' grandfather!' and and a a pretty pretty little little girl girl with with long, long, flaxen, flaxen, curling curling hair, hair, soon soon came came running running into into the the shop. shop. 'this 'this is is my my little little elephant, elephant, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, fondling fondling the the child. child. 'siamese 'siamese breed, breed, sir. sir. now, now, little little elephant!' elephant!' the the little little elephant elephant set set the the door door of of the the parlour parlour open, open, enabling enabling me me to to see see that, that, in in these these latter latter days, days, it it was was converted converted into into a a bedroom bedroom for for mr. mr. omer omer who who could could not not be be easily easily conveyed conveyed upstairs; upstairs; and and then then hid hid her her pretty pretty forehead, forehead, and and tumbled tumbled her her long long hair, hair, against against the the back back of of mr. mr. omer's omer's chair. chair. 'the 'the elephant elephant butts, butts, you know, know, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. omer, omer, winking, winking, 'when 'when he he goes goes at at a a object. object. once, once, elephant. elephant. twice. twice. three three times!' times!' at at this this signal, signal, the the little little elephant, elephant, with with a a dexterity dexterity that that was was next next to to marvellous marvellous in in so so small small an an animal, animal, whisked whisked the the chair chair round round with with mr. mr. omer omer in in it, it, and and rattled rattled it it off, off, pell-mell, pell-mell, into into the the parlour, parlour, without without touching touching the the door-post: door-post: mr. mr. omer omer indescribably indescribably enjoying enjoying the the performance, performance, and and looking looking back back at at me me on on the the road road as as if if it it were were the the triumphant triumphant issue issue of of his his life's life's exertions. exertions. after after a a stroll stroll about about the the town town i i went went to to ham's ham's house. house. peggotty peggotty had had now now removed removed here here for for good; good; and and had had let let her her own own house house to to the the successor successor of of mr. mr. barkis barkis in in the the carrying carrying business, business, who who had had paid paid her her very very well well for for the the good-will, good-will, cart, cart, and and horse. horse. i i believe believe the the very very same same slow slow horse horse that that mr. mr. barkis barkis drove drove was was still still at at work. work. i i found found them them in in the the neat neat kitchen, kitchen, accompanied accompanied by by mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, who who had had been been fetched fetched from from the the old old boat boat by by mr. mr. peggotty peggotty himself. himself. i i doubt doubt if if she she could could have have been been induced induced to to desert desert her her post, post, by by anyone anyone else. else. he he had had evidently evidently told told them them all. all. both both peggotty peggotty and and mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge had had their their aprons aprons to to their their eyes, eyes, and and ham ham had had just just stepped stepped out out 'to 'to take take a a turn turn on on the the beach'. beach'. he he presently presently came came home, home, very very glad glad to to see see me; me; and and i i hope hope they they were were all all the the better better for for my my being being there. there. we we spoke, spoke, with with some some approach approach to to cheerfulness, cheerfulness, of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's growing growing rich rich in in a a new new country, country, and and of of the the wonders wonders he he would would describe describe in in his his letters. letters. we we said said nothing nothing of of emily emily by by name, name, but but distantly distantly referred referred to to her her more more than than once. once. ham ham was was the the serenest serenest of of the the party. party. but, but, peggotty peggotty told told me, me, when when she she lighted lighted me me to to a a little little chamber chamber where where the the crocodile crocodile book book was was lying lying ready ready for for me me on on the the table, table, that that he he always always was was the the same. same. she she believed believed (she (she told told me, me, crying) crying) that that he he was was broken-hearted; broken-hearted; though though he he was was as as full full of of courage courage as as of of sweetness, sweetness, and and worked worked harder harder and and better better than than any any boat-builder boat-builder in in any any yard yard in in all all that that part. part. there there were were times, times, she she said, said, of of an an evening, evening, when when he he talked talked of of their their old old life life in in the the boat-house; boat-house; and and then then he he mentioned mentioned emily emily as as a a child. child. but, but, he he never never mentioned mentioned her her as as a a woman. woman. i i thought thought i i had had read read in in his his face face that that he he would would like like to to speak speak to to me me alone. alone. i i therefore therefore resolved resolved to to put put myself myself in in his his way way next next evening, evening, as as he he came came home home from from his his work. work. having having settled settled this this with with myself, myself, i i fell fell asleep. asleep. that that night, night, for for the the first first time time in in all all those those many many nights, nights, the the candle candle was was taken taken out out of of the the window, window, mr. mr. peggotty peggotty swung swung in in his his old old hammock hammock in in the the old old boat, boat, and and the the wind wind murmured murmured with with the the old old sound sound round round his his head. head. all all next next day, day, he he was was occupied occupied in in disposing disposing of of his his fishing-boat fishing-boat and and tackle; tackle; in in packing packing up, up, and and sending sending to to london london by by waggon, waggon, such such of of his his little little domestic domestic possessions possessions as as he he thought thought would would be be useful useful to to him; him; and and in in parting parting with with the the rest, rest, or or bestowing bestowing them them on on mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. she she was was with with him him all all day. day. as as i i had had a a sorrowful sorrowful wish wish to to see see the the old old place place once once more, more, before before it it was was locked locked up, up, i i engaged engaged to to meet meet them them there there in in the the evening. evening. but but i i so so arranged arranged it, it, as as that that i i should should meet meet ham ham first. first. it it was was easy easy to to come come in in his his way, way, as as i i knew knew where where he he worked. worked. i i met met him him at at a a retired retired part part of of the the sands, sands, which which i i knew knew he he would would cross, cross, and and turned turned back back with with him, him, that that he he might might have have leisure leisure to to speak speak to to me me if if he he really really wished. wished. i i had had not not mistaken mistaken the the expression expression of of his his face. face. we we had had walked walked but but a a little little way way together, together, when when he he said, said, without without looking looking at at me: me: 'mas'r 'mas'r davy, davy, have have you seen seen her?' her?' 'only 'only for for a a moment, moment, when when she she was was in in a a swoon,' swoon,' i i softly softly answered. answered. we we walked walked a a little little farther, farther, and and he he said: said: 'mas'r 'mas'r davy, davy, shall shall you see see her, her, d'ye d'ye think?' think?' 'it 'it would would be be too too painful painful to to her, her, perhaps,' perhaps,' said said i. i. 'i 'i have have thowt thowt of of that,' that,' he he replied. replied. 'so 'so 'twould, 'twould, sir, sir, so so 'twould.' 'twould.' 'but, 'but, ham,' ham,' said said i, i, gently, gently, 'if 'if there there is is anything anything that that i i could could write write to to her, her, for for you, in in case case i i could could not not tell tell it; it; if if there there is is anything anything you would would wish wish to to make make known known to to her her through through me; me; i i should should consider consider it it a a sacred sacred trust.' trust.' 'i 'i am am sure sure on't. on't. i i thankee, thankee, sir, sir, most most kind! kind! i i think think theer theer is is something something i i could could wish wish said said or or wrote.' wrote.' 'what 'what is is it?' it?' we we walked walked a a little little farther farther in in silence, silence, and and then then he he spoke. spoke. ''tan't ''tan't that that i i forgive forgive her. her. 'tan't 'tan't that that so so much. much. 'tis 'tis more more as as i i beg beg of of her her to to forgive forgive me, me, for for having having pressed pressed my my affections affections upon upon her. her. odd odd times, times, i i think think that that if if i i hadn't hadn't had had her her promise promise fur fur to to marry marry me, me, sir, sir, she she was was that that trustful trustful of of me, me, in in a a friendly friendly way, way, that that she'd she'd have have told told me me what what was was struggling struggling in in her her mind, mind, and and would would have have counselled counselled with with me, me, and and i i might might have have saved saved her.' her.' i i pressed pressed his his hand. hand. 'is 'is that that all?' all?' 'theer's 'theer's yet yet a a something something else,' else,' he he returned, returned, 'if 'if i i can can say say it, it, mas'r mas'r davy.' davy.' we we walked walked on, on, farther farther than than we we had had walked walked yet, yet, before before he he spoke spoke again. again. he he was was not not crying crying when when he he made made the the pauses pauses i i shall shall express express by by lines. lines. he he was was merely merely collecting collecting himself himself to to speak speak very very plainly. plainly. 'i 'i loved loved her her -- -- and and i i love love the the mem'ry mem'ry of of her her -- -- too too deep deep -- -- to to be be able able to to lead lead her her to to believe believe of of my my own own self self as as i'm i'm a a happy happy man. man. i i could could only only be be happy happy -- -- by by forgetting forgetting of of her her -- -- and and i'm i'm afeerd afeerd i i couldn't couldn't hardly hardly bear bear as as she she should should be be told told i i done done that. that. but but if if you, being being so so full full of of learning, learning, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, could could think think of of anything anything to to say say as as might might bring bring her her to to believe believe i i wasn't wasn't greatly greatly hurt: hurt: still still loving loving of of her, her, and and mourning mourning for for her: her: anything anything as as might might bring bring her her to to believe believe as as i i was was not not tired tired of of my my life, life, and and yet yet was was hoping hoping fur fur to to see see her her without without blame, blame, wheer wheer the the wicked wicked cease cease from from troubling troubling and and the the weary weary are are at at rest rest -- -- anything anything as as would would ease ease her her sorrowful sorrowful mind, mind, and and yet yet not not make make her her think think as as i i could could ever ever marry, marry, or or as as 'twas 'twas possible possible that that anyone anyone could could ever ever be be to to me me what what she she was was -- -- i i should should ask ask of of you to to say say that that -- -- with with my my prayers prayers for for her her -- -- that that was was so so dear.' dear.' i i pressed pressed his his manly manly hand hand again, again, and and told told him him i i would would charge charge myself myself to to do do this this as as well well as as i i could. could. 'i 'i thankee, thankee, sir,' sir,' he he answered. answered. ''twas ''twas kind kind of of you to to meet meet me. me. 'twas 'twas kind kind of of you to to bear bear him him company company down. down. mas'r mas'r davy, davy, i i unnerstan' unnerstan' very very well, well, though though my my aunt aunt will will come come to to lon'on lon'on afore afore they they sail, sail, and and they'll they'll unite unite once once more, more, that that i i am am not not like like to to see see him him agen. agen. i i fare fare to to feel feel sure sure on't. on't. we we doen't doen't say say so, so, but but so so 'twill 'twill be, be, and and better better so. so. the the last last you see see on on him him -- -- the the very very last last -- -- will will you give give him him the the lovingest lovingest duty duty and and thanks thanks of of the the orphan, orphan, as as he he was was ever ever more more than than a a father father to?' to?' this this i i also also promised, promised, faithfully. faithfully. 'i 'i thankee thankee agen, agen, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, heartily heartily shaking shaking hands. hands. 'i 'i know know wheer wheer you're you're a-going. a-going. good-bye!' good-bye!' with with a a slight slight wave wave of of his his hand, hand, as as though though to to explain explain to to me me that that he he could could not not enter enter the the old old place, place, he he turned turned away. away. as as i i looked looked after after his his figure, figure, crossing crossing the the waste waste in in the the moonlight, moonlight, i i saw saw him him turn turn his his face face towards towards a a strip strip of of silvery silvery light light upon upon the the sea, sea, and and pass pass on, on, looking looking at at it, it, until until he he was was a a shadow shadow in in the the distance. distance. the the door door of of the the boat-house boat-house stood stood open open when when i i approached; approached; and, and, on on entering, entering, i i found found it it emptied emptied of of all all its its furniture, furniture, saving saving one one of of the the old old lockers, lockers, on on which which mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, with with a a basket basket on on her her knee, knee, was was seated, seated, looking looking at at mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. he he leaned leaned his his elbow elbow on on the the rough rough chimney-piece, chimney-piece, and and gazed gazed upon upon a a few few expiring expiring embers embers in in the the grate; grate; but but he he raised raised his his head, head, hopefully, hopefully, on on my my coming coming in, in, and and spoke spoke in in a a cheery cheery manner. manner. 'come, 'come, according according to to promise, promise, to to bid bid farewell farewell to to 't, 't, eh, eh, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' he he said, said, taking taking up up the the candle. candle. 'bare 'bare enough, enough, now, now, an't an't it?' it?' 'indeed 'indeed you have have made made good good use use of of the the time,' time,' said said i. i. 'why, 'why, we we have have not not been been idle, idle, sir. sir. missis missis gummidge gummidge has has worked worked like like a a -- -- i i doen't doen't know know what what missis missis gummidge gummidge an't an't worked worked like,' like,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, looking looking at at her, her, at at a a loss loss for for a a sufficiently sufficiently approving approving simile. simile. mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, leaning leaning on on her her basket, basket, made made no no observation. observation. 'theer's 'theer's the the very very locker locker that that you used used to to sit sit on, on, 'long 'long with with em'ly!' em'ly!' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, in in a a whisper. whisper. 'i'm 'i'm a-going a-going to to carry carry it it away away with with me, me, last last of of all. all. and and heer's heer's your your old old little little bedroom, bedroom, see, see, mas'r mas'r davy! davy! a'most a'most as as bleak bleak tonight, tonight, as as 'art 'art could could wish!' wish!' in in truth, truth, the the wind, wind, though though it it was was low, low, had had a a solemn solemn sound, sound, and and crept crept around around the the deserted deserted house house with with a a whispered whispered wailing wailing that that was was very very mournful. mournful. everything everything was was gone, gone, down down to to the the little little mirror mirror with with the the oyster-shell oyster-shell frame. frame. i i thought thought of of myself, myself, lying lying here, here, when when that that first first great great change change was was being being wrought wrought at at home. home. i i thought thought of of the the blue-eyed blue-eyed child child who who had had enchanted enchanted me. me. i i thought thought of of steerforth: steerforth: and and a a foolish, foolish, fearful fearful fancy fancy came came upon upon me me of of his his being being near near at at hand, hand, and and liable liable to to be be met met at at any any turn. turn. ''tis ''tis like like to to be be long,' long,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, in in a a low low voice, voice, 'afore 'afore the the boat boat finds finds new new tenants. tenants. they they look look upon upon 't, 't, down down heer, heer, as as being being unfortunate unfortunate now!' now!' 'does 'does it it belong belong to to anybody anybody in in the the neighbourhood?' neighbourhood?' i i asked. asked. 'to 'to a a mast-maker mast-maker up up town,' town,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'i'm 'i'm a-going a-going to to give give the the key key to to him him tonight.' tonight.' we we looked looked into into the the other other little little room, room, and and came came back back to to mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, sitting sitting on on the the locker, locker, whom whom mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, putting putting the the light light on on the the chimney-piece, chimney-piece, requested requested to to rise, rise, that that he he might might carry carry it it outside outside the the door door before before extinguishing extinguishing the the candle. candle. 'dan'l,' 'dan'l,' said said mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, suddenly suddenly deserting deserting her her basket, basket, and and clinging clinging to to his his arm arm 'my 'my dear dear dan'l, dan'l, the the parting parting words words i i speak speak in in this this house house is, is, i i mustn't mustn't be be left left behind. behind. doen't doen't ye ye think think of of leaving leaving me me behind, behind, dan'l! dan'l! oh, oh, doen't doen't ye ye ever ever do do it!' it!' mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, taken taken aback, aback, looked looked from from mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge to to me, me, and and from from me me to to mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, as as if if he he had had been been awakened awakened from from a a sleep. sleep. 'doen't 'doen't ye, ye, dearest dearest dan'l, dan'l, doen't doen't ye!' ye!' cried cried mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, fervently. fervently. 'take 'take me me 'long 'long with with you, dan'l, dan'l, take take me me 'long 'long with with you and and em'ly! em'ly! i'll i'll be be your your servant, servant, constant constant and and trew. trew. if if there's there's slaves slaves in in them them parts parts where where you're you're a-going, a-going, i'll i'll be be bound bound to to you for for one, one, and and happy, happy, but but doen't doen't ye ye leave leave me me behind, behind, dan'l, dan'l, that's that's a a deary deary dear!' dear!' 'my 'my good good soul,' soul,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, shaking shaking his his head, head, 'you doen't doen't know know what what a a long long voyage, voyage, and and what what a a hard hard life life 'tis!' 'tis!' 'yes, 'yes, i i do, do, dan'l! dan'l! i i can can guess!' guess!' cried cried mrs. mrs. gummidge. gummidge. 'but 'but my my parting parting words words under under this this roof roof is, is, i i shall shall go go into into the the house house and and die, die, if if i i am am not not took. took. i i can can dig, dig, dan'l. dan'l. i i can can work. work. i i can can live live hard. hard. i i can can be be loving loving and and patient patient now now -- -- more more than than you think, think, dan'l, dan'l, if if you'll you'll on'y on'y try try me. me. i i wouldn't wouldn't touch touch the the 'lowance, 'lowance, not not if if i i was was dying dying of of want, want, dan'l dan'l peggotty; peggotty; but but i'll i'll go go with with you and and em'ly, em'ly, if if you'll you'll on'y on'y let let me, me, to to the the world's world's end! end! i i know know how how 'tis; 'tis; i i know know you think think that that i i am am lone lone and and lorn; lorn; but, but, deary deary love, love, 'tan't 'tan't so so no no more! more! i i ain't ain't sat sat here, here, so so long, long, a-watching, a-watching, and and a-thinking a-thinking of of your your trials, trials, without without some some good good being being done done me. me. mas'r mas'r davy, davy, speak speak to to him him for for me! me! i i knows knows his his ways, ways, and and em'ly's, em'ly's, and and i i knows knows their their sorrows, sorrows, and and can can be be a a comfort comfort to to 'em, 'em, some some odd odd times, times, and and labour labour for for 'em 'em allus! allus! dan'l, dan'l, deary deary dan'l, dan'l, let let me me go go 'long 'long with with you!' and and mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge took took his his hand, hand, and and kissed kissed it it with with a a homely homely pathos pathos and and affection, affection, in in a a homely homely rapture rapture of of devotion devotion and and gratitude, gratitude, that that he he well well deserved. deserved. we we brought brought the the locker locker out, out, extinguished extinguished the the candle, candle, fastened fastened the the door door on on the the outside, outside, and and left left the the old old boat boat close close shut shut up, up, a a dark dark speck speck in in the the cloudy cloudy night. night. next next day, day, when when we we were were returning returning to to london london outside outside the the coach, coach, mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge and and her her basket basket were were on on the the seat seat behind, behind, and and mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge was was happy. happy. chapter chapter 52. 52. i i assist assist at at an an explosion explosion when when the the time time mr. mr. micawber micawber had had appointed appointed so so mysteriously, mysteriously, was was within within four-and-twenty four-and-twenty hours hours of of being being come, come, my my aunt aunt and and i i consulted consulted how how we we should should proceed; proceed; for for my my aunt aunt was was very very unwilling unwilling to to leave leave dora. dora. ah! ah! how how easily easily i i carried carried dora dora up up and and down down stairs, stairs, now! now! we we were were disposed, disposed, notwithstanding notwithstanding mr. mr. micawber's micawber's stipulation stipulation for for my my aunt's aunt's attendance, attendance, to to arrange arrange that that she she should should stay stay at at home, home, and and be be represented represented by by mr. mr. dick dick and and me. me. in in short, short, we we had had resolved resolved to to take take this this course, course, when when dora dora again again unsettled unsettled us us by by declaring declaring that that she she never never would would forgive forgive herself, herself, and and never never would would forgive forgive her her bad bad boy, boy, if if my my aunt aunt remained remained behind, behind, on on any any pretence. pretence. 'i 'i won't won't speak speak to to you,' said said dora, dora, shaking shaking her her curls curls at at my my aunt. aunt. 'i'll 'i'll be be disagreeable! disagreeable! i'll i'll make make jip jip bark bark at at you all all day. day. i i shall shall be be sure sure that that you really really are are a a cross cross old old thing, thing, if if you don't don't go!' go!' 'tut, 'tut, blossom!' blossom!' laughed laughed my my aunt. aunt. 'you know know you can't can't do do without without me!' me!' 'yes, 'yes, i i can,' can,' said said dora. dora. 'you are are no no use use to to me me at at all. all. you never never run run up up and and down down stairs stairs for for me, me, all all day day long. long. you never never sit sit and and tell tell me me stories stories about about doady, doady, when when his his shoes shoes were were worn worn out, out, and and he he was was covered covered with with dust dust -- -- oh, oh, what what a a poor poor little little mite mite of of a a fellow! fellow! you never never do do anything anything at at all all to to please please me, me, do do you, dear?' dear?' dora dora made made haste haste to to kiss kiss my my aunt, aunt, and and say, say, 'yes, 'yes, you do! do! i'm i'm only only joking!'-lest joking!'-lest my my aunt aunt should should think think she she really really meant meant it. it. 'but, 'but, aunt,' aunt,' said said dora, dora, coaxingly, coaxingly, 'now 'now listen. listen. you must must go. go. i i shall shall tease tease you, 'till 'till you let let me me have have my my own own way way about about it. it. i i shall shall lead lead my my naughty naughty boy boy such such a a life, life, if if he he don't don't make make you go. go. i i shall shall make make myself myself so so disagreeable disagreeable -- -- and and so so will will jip! jip! you'll you'll wish wish you had had gone, gone, like like a a good good thing, thing, for for ever ever and and ever ever so so long, long, if if you don't don't go. go. besides,' besides,' said said dora, dora, putting putting back back her her hair, hair, and and looking looking wonderingly wonderingly at at my my aunt aunt and and me, me, 'why 'why shouldn't shouldn't you both both go? go? i i am am not not very very ill ill indeed. indeed. am am i?' i?' 'why, 'why, what what a a question!' question!' cried cried my my aunt. aunt. 'what 'what a a fancy!' fancy!' said said i. i. 'yes! 'yes! i i know know i i am am a a silly silly little little thing!' thing!' said said dora, dora, slowly slowly looking looking from from one one of of us us to to the the other, other, and and then then putting putting up up her her pretty pretty lips lips to to kiss kiss us us as as she she lay lay upon upon her her couch. couch. 'well, 'well, then, then, you must must both both go, go, or or i i shall shall not not believe believe you; and and then then i i shall shall cry!' cry!' i i saw, saw, in in my my aunt's aunt's face, face, that that she she began began to to give give way way now, now, and and dora dora brightened brightened again, again, as as she she saw saw it it too. too. 'you'll 'you'll come come back back with with so so much much to to tell tell me, me, that that it'll it'll take take at at least least a a week week to to make make me me understand!' understand!' said said dora. dora. 'because 'because i i know know i i shan't shan't understand, understand, for for a a length length of of time, time, if if there's there's any any business business in in it. it. and and there's there's sure sure to to be be some some business business in in it! it! if if there's there's anything anything to to add add up, up, besides, besides, i i don't don't know know when when i i shall shall make make it it out; out; and and my my bad bad boy boy will will look look so so miserable miserable all all the the time. time. there! there! now now you'll you'll go, go, won't won't you? you'll you'll only only be be gone gone one one night, night, and and jip jip will will take take care care of of me me while while you are are gone. gone. doady doady will will carry carry me me upstairs upstairs before before you go, go, and and i i won't won't come come down down again again till till you come come back; back; and and you shall shall take take agnes agnes a a dreadfully dreadfully scolding scolding letter letter from from me, me, because because she she has has never never been been to to see see us!' us!' we we agreed, agreed, without without any any more more consultation, consultation, that that we we would would both both go, go, and and that that dora dora was was a a little little impostor, impostor, who who feigned feigned to to be be rather rather unwell, unwell, because because she she liked liked to to be be petted. petted. she she was was greatly greatly pleased, pleased, and and very very merry; merry; and and we we four, four, that that is is to to say, say, my my aunt, aunt, mr. mr. dick, dick, traddles, traddles, and and i, i, went went down down to to canterbury canterbury by by the the dover dover mail mail that that night. night. at at the the hotel hotel where where mr. mr. micawber micawber had had requested requested us us to to await await him, him, which which we we got got into, into, with with some some trouble, trouble, in in the the middle middle of of the the night, night, i i found found a a letter, letter, importing importing that that he he would would appear appear in in the the morning morning punctually punctually at at half half past past nine. nine. after after which, which, we we went went shivering, shivering, at at that that uncomfortable uncomfortable hour, hour, to to our our respective respective beds, beds, through through various various close close passages; passages; which which smelt smelt as as if if they they had had been been steeped, steeped, for for ages, ages, in in a a solution solution of of soup soup and and stables. stables. early early in in the the morning, morning, i i sauntered sauntered through through the the dear dear old old tranquil tranquil streets, streets, and and again again mingled mingled with with the the shadows shadows of of the the venerable venerable gateways gateways and and churches. churches. the the rooks rooks were were sailing sailing about about the the cathedral cathedral towers; towers; and and the the towers towers themselves, themselves, overlooking overlooking many many a a long long unaltered unaltered mile mile of of the the rich rich country country and and its its pleasant pleasant streams, streams, were were cutting cutting the the bright bright morning morning air, air, as as if if there there were were no no such such thing thing as as change change on on earth. earth. yet yet the the bells, bells, when when they they sounded, sounded, told told me me sorrowfully sorrowfully of of change change in in everything; everything; told told me me of of their their own own age, age, and and my my pretty pretty dora's dora's youth; youth; and and of of the the many, many, never never old, old, who who had had lived lived and and loved loved and and died, died, while while the the reverberations reverberations of of the the bells bells had had hummed hummed through through the the rusty rusty armour armour of of the the black black prince prince hanging hanging up up within, within, and, and, motes motes upon upon the the deep deep of of time, time, had had lost lost themselves themselves in in air, air, as as circles circles do do in in water. water. i i looked looked at at the the old old house house from from the the corner corner of of the the street, street, but but did did not not go go nearer nearer to to it, it, lest, lest, being being observed, observed, i i might might unwittingly unwittingly do do any any harm harm to to the the design design i i had had come come to to aid. aid. the the early early sun sun was was striking striking edgewise edgewise on on its its gables gables and and lattice-windows, lattice-windows, touching touching them them with with gold; gold; and and some some beams beams of of its its old old peace peace seemed seemed to to touch touch my my heart. heart. i i strolled strolled into into the the country country for for an an hour hour or or so, so, and and then then returned returned by by the the main main street, street, which which in in the the interval interval had had shaken shaken off off its its last last night's night's sleep. sleep. among among those those who who were were stirring stirring in in the the shops, shops, i i saw saw my my ancient ancient enemy enemy the the butcher, butcher, now now advanced advanced to to top-boots top-boots and and a a baby, baby, and and in in business business for for himself. himself. he he was was nursing nursing the the baby, baby, and and appeared appeared to to be be a a benignant benignant member member of of society. society. we we all all became became very very anxious anxious and and impatient, impatient, when when we we sat sat down down to to breakfast. breakfast. as as it it approached approached nearer nearer and and nearer nearer to to half half past past nine nine o'clock, o'clock, our our restless restless expectation expectation of of mr. mr. micawber micawber increased. increased. at at last last we we made made no no more more pretence pretence of of attending attending to to the the meal, meal, which, which, except except with with mr. mr. dick, dick, had had been been a a mere mere form form from from the the first; first; but but my my aunt aunt walked walked up up and and down down the the room, room, traddles traddles sat sat upon upon the the sofa sofa affecting affecting to to read read the the paper paper with with his his eyes eyes on on the the ceiling; ceiling; and and i i looked looked out out of of the the window window to to give give early early notice notice of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's coming. coming. nor nor had had i i long long to to watch, watch, for, for, at at the the first first chime chime of of the the half half hour, hour, he he appeared appeared in in the the street. street. 'here 'here he he is,' is,' said said i, i, 'and 'and not not in in his his legal legal attire!' attire!' my my aunt aunt tied tied the the strings strings of of her her bonnet bonnet (she (she had had come come down down to to breakfast breakfast in in it), it), and and put put on on her her shawl, shawl, as as if if she she were were ready ready for for anything anything that that was was resolute resolute and and uncompromising. uncompromising. traddles traddles buttoned buttoned his his coat coat with with a a determined determined air. air. mr. mr. dick, dick, disturbed disturbed by by these these formidable formidable appearances, appearances, but but feeling feeling it it necessary necessary to to imitate imitate them, them, pulled pulled his his hat, hat, with with both both hands, hands, as as firmly firmly over over his his ears ears as as he he possibly possibly could; could; and and instantly instantly took took it it off off again, again, to to welcome welcome mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'gentlemen, 'gentlemen, and and madam,' madam,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'good 'good morning! morning! my my dear dear sir,' sir,' to to mr. mr. dick, dick, who who shook shook hands hands with with him him violently, violently, 'you are are extremely extremely good.' good.' 'have 'have you breakfasted?' breakfasted?' said said mr. mr. dick. dick. 'have 'have a a chop!' chop!' 'not 'not for for the the world, world, my my good good sir!' sir!' cried cried mr. mr. micawber, micawber, stopping stopping him him on on his his way way to to the the bell; bell; 'appetite 'appetite and and myself, myself, mr. mr. dixon, dixon, have have long long been been strangers.' strangers.' mr. mr. dixon dixon was was so so well well pleased pleased with with his his new new name, name, and and appeared appeared to to think think it it so so obliging obliging in in mr. mr. micawber micawber to to confer confer it it upon upon him, him, that that he he shook shook hands hands with with him him again, again, and and laughed laughed rather rather childishly. childishly. 'dick,' 'dick,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'attention!' 'attention!' mr. mr. dick dick recovered recovered himself, himself, with with a a blush. blush. 'now, 'now, sir,' sir,' said said my my aunt aunt to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, as as she she put put on on her her gloves, gloves, 'we 'we are are ready ready for for mount mount vesuvius, vesuvius, or or anything anything else, else, as as soon soon as as you please.' please.' 'madam,' 'madam,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i trust trust you will will shortly shortly witness witness an an eruption. eruption. mr. mr. traddles, traddles, i i have have your your permission, permission, i i believe, believe, to to mention mention here here that that we we have have been been in in communication communication together?' together?' 'it 'it is is undoubtedly undoubtedly the the fact, fact, copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, to to whom whom i i looked looked in in surprise. surprise. 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber has has consulted consulted me me in in reference reference to to what what he he has has in in contemplation; contemplation; and and i i have have advised advised him him to to the the best best of of my my judgement.' judgement.' 'unless 'unless i i deceive deceive myself, myself, mr. mr. traddles,' traddles,' pursued pursued mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'what 'what i i contemplate contemplate is is a a disclosure disclosure of of an an important important nature.' nature.' 'highly 'highly so,' so,' said said traddles. traddles. 'perhaps, 'perhaps, under under such such circumstances, circumstances, madam madam and and gentlemen,' gentlemen,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'you will will do do me me the the favour favour to to submit submit yourselves, yourselves, for for the the moment, moment, to to the the direction direction of of one one who, who, however however unworthy unworthy to to be be regarded regarded in in any any other other light light but but as as a a waif waif and and stray stray upon upon the the shore shore of of human human nature, nature, is is still still your your fellow-man, fellow-man, though though crushed crushed out out of of his his original original form form by by individual individual errors, errors, and and the the accumulative accumulative force force of of a a combination combination of of circumstances?' circumstances?' 'we 'we have have perfect perfect confidence confidence in in you, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i, i, 'and 'and will will do do what what you please.' please.' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'your 'your confidence confidence is is not, not, at at the the existing existing juncture, juncture, ill-bestowed. ill-bestowed. i i would would beg beg to to be be allowed allowed a a start start of of five five minutes minutes by by the the clock; clock; and and then then to to receive receive the the present present company, company, inquiring inquiring for for miss miss wickfield, wickfield, at at the the office office of of wickfield wickfield and and heep, heep, whose whose stipendiary stipendiary i i am.' am.' my my aunt aunt and and i i looked looked at at traddles, traddles, who who nodded nodded his his approval. approval. 'i 'i have have no no more,' more,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'to 'to say say at at present.' present.' with with which, which, to to my my infinite infinite surprise, surprise, he he included included us us all all in in a a comprehensive comprehensive bow, bow, and and disappeared; disappeared; his his manner manner being being extremely extremely distant, distant, and and his his face face extremely extremely pale. pale. traddles traddles only only smiled, smiled, and and shook shook his his head head (with (with his his hair hair standing standing upright upright on on the the top top of of it), it), when when i i looked looked to to him him for for an an explanation; explanation; so so i i took took out out my my watch, watch, and, and, as as a a last last resource, resource, counted counted off off the the five five minutes. minutes. my my aunt, aunt, with with her her own own watch watch in in her her hand, hand, did did the the like. like. when when the the time time was was expired, expired, traddles traddles gave gave her her his his arm; arm; and and we we all all went went out out together together to to the the old old house, house, without without saying saying one one word word on on the the way. way. we we found found mr. mr. micawber micawber at at his his desk, desk, in in the the turret turret office office on on the the ground ground floor, floor, either either writing, writing, or or pretending pretending to to write, write, hard. hard. the the large large office-ruler office-ruler was was stuck stuck into into his his waistcoat, waistcoat, and and was was not not so so well well concealed concealed but but that that a a foot foot or or more more of of that that instrument instrument protruded protruded from from his his bosom, bosom, like like a a new new kind kind of of shirt-frill. shirt-frill. as as it it appeared appeared to to me me that that i i was was expected expected to to speak, speak, i i said said aloud: aloud: 'how 'how do do you do, do, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' 'mr. 'mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, gravely, gravely, 'i 'i hope hope i i see see you well?' well?' 'is 'is miss miss wickfield wickfield at at home?' home?' said said i. i. 'mr. 'mr. wickfield wickfield is is unwell unwell in in bed, bed, sir, sir, of of a a rheumatic rheumatic fever,' fever,' he he returned; returned; 'but 'but miss miss wickfield, wickfield, i i have have no no doubt, doubt, will will be be happy happy to to see see old old friends. friends. will will you walk walk in, in, sir?' sir?' he he preceded preceded us us to to the the dining-room dining-room -- -- the the first first room room i i had had entered entered in in that that house house -- -- and and flinging flinging open open the the door door of of mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's former former office, office, said, said, in in a a sonorous sonorous voice: voice: 'miss 'miss trotwood, trotwood, mr. mr. david david copperfield, copperfield, mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles, traddles, and and mr. mr. dixon!' dixon!' i i had had not not seen seen uriah uriah heep heep since since the the time time of of the the blow. blow. our our visit visit astonished astonished him, him, evidently; evidently; not not the the less, less, i i dare dare say, say, because because it it astonished astonished ourselves. ourselves. he he did did not not gather gather his his eyebrows eyebrows together, together, for for he he had had none none worth worth mentioning; mentioning; but but he he frowned frowned to to that that degree degree that that he he almost almost closed closed his his small small eyes, eyes, while while the the hurried hurried raising raising of of his his grisly grisly hand hand to to his his chin chin betrayed betrayed some some trepidation trepidation or or surprise. surprise. this this was was only only when when we we were were in in the the act act of of entering entering his his room, room, and and when when i i caught caught a a glance glance at at him him over over my my aunt's aunt's shoulder. shoulder. a a moment moment afterwards, afterwards, he he was was as as fawning fawning and and as as humble humble as as ever. ever. 'well, 'well, i i am am sure,' sure,' he he said. said. 'this 'this is is indeed indeed an an unexpected unexpected pleasure! pleasure! to to have, have, as as i i may may say, say, all all friends friends round round st. st. paul's paul's at at once, once, is is a a treat treat unlooked unlooked for! for! mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i hope hope i i see see you well, well, and and -- -- if if i i may may umbly umbly express express myself myself so so -- -- friendly friendly towards towards them them as as is is ever ever your your friends, friends, whether whether or or not. not. mrs. mrs. copperfield, copperfield, sir, sir, i i hope hope she's she's getting getting on. on. we we have have been been made made quite quite uneasy uneasy by by the the poor poor accounts accounts we we have have had had of of her her state, state, lately, lately, i i do do assure assure you.' i i felt felt ashamed ashamed to to let let him him take take my my hand, hand, but but i i did did not not know know yet yet what what else else to to do. do. 'things 'things are are changed changed in in this this office, office, miss miss trotwood, trotwood, since since i i was was an an umble umble clerk, clerk, and and held held your your pony; pony; ain't ain't they?' they?' said said uriah, uriah, with with his his sickliest sickliest smile. smile. 'but 'but i i am am not not changed, changed, miss miss trotwood.' trotwood.' 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'to 'to tell tell you the the truth, truth, i i think think you are are pretty pretty constant constant to to the the promise promise of of your your youth; youth; if if that's that's any any satisfaction satisfaction to to you.' 'thank 'thank you, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said uriah, uriah, writhing writhing in in his his ungainly ungainly manner, manner, 'for 'for your your good good opinion! opinion! micawber, micawber, tell tell 'em 'em to to let let miss miss agnes agnes know know -- -- and and mother. mother. mother mother will will be be quite quite in in a a state, state, when when she she sees sees the the present present company!' company!' said said uriah, uriah, setting setting chairs. chairs. 'you are are not not busy, busy, mr. mr. heep?' heep?' said said traddles, traddles, whose whose eye eye the the cunning cunning red red eye eye accidentally accidentally caught, caught, as as it it at at once once scrutinized scrutinized and and evaded evaded us. us. 'no, 'no, mr. mr. traddles,' traddles,' replied replied uriah, uriah, resuming resuming his his official official seat, seat, and and squeezing squeezing his his bony bony hands, hands, laid laid palm palm to to palm palm between between his his bony bony knees. knees. 'not 'not so so much much so so as as i i could could wish. wish. but but lawyers, lawyers, sharks, sharks, and and leeches, leeches, are are not not easily easily satisfied, satisfied, you know! know! not not but but what what myself myself and and micawber micawber have have our our hands hands pretty pretty full, full, in in general, general, on on account account of of mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's being being hardly hardly fit fit for for any any occupation, occupation, sir. sir. but but it's it's a a pleasure pleasure as as well well as as a a duty, duty, i i am am sure, sure, to to work work for for him. him. you've you've not not been been intimate intimate with with mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, i i think, think, mr. mr. traddles? traddles? i i believe believe i've i've only only had had the the honour honour of of seeing seeing you once once myself?' myself?' 'no, 'no, i i have have not not been been intimate intimate with with mr. mr. wickfield,' wickfield,' returned returned traddles; traddles; 'or 'or i i might might perhaps perhaps have have waited waited on on you long long ago, ago, mr. mr. heep.' heep.' there there was was something something in in the the tone tone of of this this reply, reply, which which made made uriah uriah look look at at the the speaker speaker again, again, with with a a very very sinister sinister and and suspicious suspicious expression. expression. but, but, seeing seeing only only traddles, traddles, with with his his good-natured good-natured face, face, simple simple manner, manner, and and hair hair on on end, end, he he dismissed dismissed it it as as he he replied, replied, with with a a jerk jerk of of his his whole whole body, body, but but especially especially his his throat: throat: 'i 'i am am sorry sorry for for that, that, mr. mr. traddles. traddles. you would would have have admired admired him him as as much much as as we we all all do. do. his his little little failings failings would would only only have have endeared endeared him him to to you the the more. more. but but if if you would would like like to to hear hear my my fellow-partner fellow-partner eloquently eloquently spoken spoken of, of, i i should should refer refer you to to copperfield. copperfield. the the family family is is a a subject subject he's he's very very strong strong upon, upon, if if you never never heard heard him.' him.' i i was was prevented prevented from from disclaiming disclaiming the the compliment compliment (if (if i i should should have have done done so, so, in in any any case), case), by by the the entrance entrance of of agnes, agnes, now now ushered ushered in in by by mr. mr. micawber. micawber. she she was was not not quite quite so so self-possessed self-possessed as as usual, usual, i i thought; thought; and and had had evidently evidently undergone undergone anxiety anxiety and and fatigue. fatigue. but but her her earnest earnest cordiality, cordiality, and and her her quiet quiet beauty, beauty, shone shone with with the the gentler gentler lustre lustre for for it. it. i i saw saw uriah uriah watch watch her her while while she she greeted greeted us; us; and and he he reminded reminded me me of of an an ugly ugly and and rebellious rebellious genie genie watching watching a a good good spirit. spirit. in in the the meanwhile, meanwhile, some some slight slight sign sign passed passed between between mr. mr. micawber micawber and and traddles; traddles; and and traddles, traddles, unobserved unobserved except except by by me, me, went went out. out. 'don't 'don't wait, wait, micawber,' micawber,' said said uriah. uriah. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with his his hand hand upon upon the the ruler ruler in in his his breast, breast, stood stood erect erect before before the the door, door, most most unmistakably unmistakably contemplating contemplating one one of of his his fellow-men, fellow-men, and and that that man man his his employer. employer. 'what 'what are are you waiting waiting for?' for?' said said uriah. uriah. 'micawber! 'micawber! did did you hear hear me me tell tell you not not to to wait?' wait?' 'yes!' 'yes!' replied replied the the immovable immovable mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'then 'then why why do do you wait?' wait?' said said uriah. uriah. 'because 'because i i -- -- in in short, short, choose,' choose,' replied replied mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a burst. burst. uriah's uriah's cheeks cheeks lost lost colour, colour, and and an an unwholesome unwholesome paleness, paleness, still still faintly faintly tinged tinged by by his his pervading pervading red, red, overspread overspread them. them. he he looked looked at at mr. mr. micawber micawber attentively, attentively, with with his his whole whole face face breathing breathing short short and and quick quick in in every every feature. feature. 'you are are a a dissipated dissipated fellow, fellow, as as all all the the world world knows,' knows,' he he said, said, with with an an effort effort at at a a smile, smile, 'and 'and i i am am afraid afraid you'll you'll oblige oblige me me to to get get rid rid of of you. go go along! along! i'll i'll talk talk to to you presently.' presently.' 'if 'if there there is is a a scoundrel scoundrel on on this this earth,' earth,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, suddenly suddenly breaking breaking out out again again with with the the utmost utmost vehemence, vehemence, 'with 'with whom whom i i have have already already talked talked too too much, much, that that scoundrel's scoundrel's name name is is -- -- heep!' heep!' uriah uriah fell fell back, back, as as if if he he had had been been struck struck or or stung. stung. looking looking slowly slowly round round upon upon us us with with the the darkest darkest and and wickedest wickedest expression expression that that his his face face could could wear, wear, he he said, said, in in a a lower lower voice: voice: 'oho! 'oho! this this is is a a conspiracy! conspiracy! you have have met met here here by by appointment! appointment! you are are playing playing booty booty with with my my clerk, clerk, are are you, copperfield? copperfield? now, now, take take care. care. you'll you'll make make nothing nothing of of this. this. we we understand understand each each other, other, you and and me. me. there's there's no no love love between between us. us. you were were always always a a puppy puppy with with a a proud proud stomach, stomach, from from your your first first coming coming here; here; and and you envy envy me me my my rise, rise, do do you? none none of of your your plots plots against against me; me; i'll i'll counterplot counterplot you! micawber, micawber, you be be off. off. i'll i'll talk talk to to you presently.' presently.' 'mr. 'mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i, i, 'there 'there is is a a sudden sudden change change in in this this fellow, fellow, in in more more respects respects than than the the extraordinary extraordinary one one of of his his speaking speaking the the truth truth in in one one particular, particular, which which assures assures me me that that he he is is brought brought to to bay. bay. deal deal with with him him as as he he deserves!' deserves!' 'you are are a a precious precious set set of of people, people, ain't ain't you?' said said uriah, uriah, in in the the same same low low voice, voice, and and breaking breaking out out into into a a clammy clammy heat, heat, which which he he wiped wiped from from his his forehead, forehead, with with his his long long lean lean hand, hand, 'to 'to buy buy over over my my clerk, clerk, who who is is the the very very scum scum of of society, society, -- -- as as you yourself yourself were, were, copperfield, copperfield, you know know it, it, before before anyone anyone had had charity charity on on you, -- -- to to defame defame me me with with his his lies? lies? miss miss trotwood, trotwood, you had had better better stop stop this; this; or or i'll i'll stop stop your your husband husband shorter shorter than than will will be be pleasant pleasant to to you. i i won't won't know know your your story story professionally, professionally, for for nothing, nothing, old old lady! lady! miss miss wickfield, wickfield, if if you have have any any love love for for your your father, father, you had had better better not not join join that that gang. gang. i'll i'll ruin ruin him, him, if if you do. do. now, now, come! come! i i have have got got some some of of you under under the the harrow. harrow. think think twice, twice, before before it it goes goes over over you. think think twice, twice, you, micawber, micawber, if if you don't don't want want to to be be crushed. crushed. i i recommend recommend you to to take take yourself yourself off, off, and and be be talked talked to to presently, presently, you fool! fool! while while there's there's time time to to retreat. retreat. where's where's mother?' mother?' he he said, said, suddenly suddenly appearing appearing to to notice, notice, with with alarm, alarm, the the absence absence of of traddles, traddles, and and pulling pulling down down the the bell-rope. bell-rope. 'fine 'fine doings doings in in a a person's person's own own house!' house!' 'mrs. 'mrs. heep heep is is here, here, sir,' sir,' said said traddles, traddles, returning returning with with that that worthy worthy mother mother of of a a worthy worthy son. son. 'i 'i have have taken taken the the liberty liberty of of making making myself myself known known to to her.' her.' 'who 'who are are you to to make make yourself yourself known?' known?' retorted retorted uriah. uriah. 'and 'and what what do do you want want here?' here?' 'i 'i am am the the agent agent and and friend friend of of mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, sir,' sir,' said said traddles, traddles, in in a a composed composed and and business-like business-like way. way. 'and 'and i i have have a a power power of of attorney attorney from from him him in in my my pocket, pocket, to to act act for for him him in in all all matters.' matters.' 'the 'the old old ass ass has has drunk drunk himself himself into into a a state state of of dotage,' dotage,' said said uriah, uriah, turning turning uglier uglier than than before, before, 'and 'and it it has has been been got got from from him him by by fraud!' fraud!' 'something 'something has has been been got got from from him him by by fraud, fraud, i i know,' know,' returned returned traddles traddles quietly; quietly; 'and 'and so so do do you, mr. mr. heep. heep. we we will will refer refer that that question, question, if if you please, please, to to mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' 'ury 'ury -- -- !' !' mrs. mrs. heep heep began, began, with with an an anxious anxious gesture. gesture. 'you hold hold your your tongue, tongue, mother,' mother,' he he returned; returned; 'least 'least said, said, soonest soonest mended.' mended.' 'but, 'but, my my ury ury -- -- ' ' 'will 'will you hold hold your your tongue, tongue, mother, mother, and and leave leave it it to to me?' me?' though though i i had had long long known known that that his his servility servility was was false, false, and and all all his his pretences pretences knavish knavish and and hollow, hollow, i i had had had had no no adequate adequate conception conception of of the the extent extent of of his his hypocrisy, hypocrisy, until until i i now now saw saw him him with with his his mask mask off. off. the the suddenness suddenness with with which which he he dropped dropped it, it, when when he he perceived perceived that that it it was was useless useless to to him; him; the the malice, malice, insolence, insolence, and and hatred, hatred, he he revealed; revealed; the the leer leer with with which which he he exulted, exulted, even even at at this this moment, moment, in in the the evil evil he he had had done done -- -- all all this this time time being being desperate desperate too, too, and and at at his his wits' wits' end end for for the the means means of of getting getting the the better better of of us us -- -- though though perfectly perfectly consistent consistent with with the the experience experience i i had had of of him, him, at at first first took took even even me me by by surprise, surprise, who who had had known known him him so so long, long, and and disliked disliked him him so so heartily. heartily. i i say say nothing nothing of of the the look look he he conferred conferred on on me, me, as as he he stood stood eyeing eyeing us, us, one one after after another; another; for for i i had had always always understood understood that that he he hated hated me, me, and and i i remembered remembered the the marks marks of of my my hand hand upon upon his his cheek. cheek. but but when when his his eyes eyes passed passed on on to to agnes, agnes, and and i i saw saw the the rage rage with with which which he he felt felt his his power power over over her her slipping slipping away, away, and and the the exhibition, exhibition, in in their their disappointment, disappointment, of of the the odious odious passions passions that that had had led led him him to to aspire aspire to to one one whose whose virtues virtues he he could could never never appreciate appreciate or or care care for, for, i i was was shocked shocked by by the the mere mere thought thought of of her her having having lived, lived, an an hour, hour, within within sight sight of of such such a a man. man. after after some some rubbing rubbing of of the the lower lower part part of of his his face, face, and and some some looking looking at at us us with with those those bad bad eyes, eyes, over over his his grisly grisly fingers, fingers, he he made made one one more more address address to to me, me, half half whining, whining, and and half half abusive. abusive. 'you think think it it justifiable, justifiable, do do you, copperfield, copperfield, you who who pride pride yourself yourself so so much much on on your your honour honour and and all all the the rest rest of of it, it, to to sneak sneak about about my my place, place, eaves-dropping eaves-dropping with with my my clerk? clerk? if if it it had had been been me, me, i i shouldn't shouldn't have have wondered; wondered; for for i i don't don't make make myself myself out out a a gentleman gentleman (though (though i i never never was was in in the the streets streets either, either, as as you were, were, according according to to micawber), micawber), but but being being you! -- -- and and you're you're not not afraid afraid of of doing doing this, this, either? either? you don't don't think think at at all all of of what what i i shall shall do, do, in in return; return; or or of of getting getting yourself yourself into into trouble trouble for for conspiracy conspiracy and and so so forth? forth? very very well. well. we we shall shall see! see! mr. mr. what's-your-name, what's-your-name, you were were going going to to refer refer some some question question to to micawber. micawber. there's there's your your referee. referee. why why don't don't you make make him him speak? speak? he he has has learnt learnt his his lesson, lesson, i i see.' see.' seeing seeing that that what what he he said said had had no no effect effect on on me me or or any any of of us, us, he he sat sat on on the the edge edge of of his his table table with with his his hands hands in in his his pockets, pockets, and and one one of of his his splay splay feet feet twisted twisted round round the the other other leg, leg, waiting waiting doggedly doggedly for for what what might might follow. follow. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, whose whose impetuosity impetuosity i i had had restrained restrained thus thus far far with with the the greatest greatest difficulty, difficulty, and and who who had had repeatedly repeatedly interposed interposed with with the the first first syllable syllable of of scoun-drel! scoun-drel! without without getting getting to to the the second, second, now now burst burst forward, forward, drew drew the the ruler ruler from from his his breast breast (apparently (apparently as as a a defensive defensive weapon), weapon), and and produced produced from from his his pocket pocket a a foolscap foolscap document, document, folded folded in in the the form form of of a a large large letter. letter. opening opening this this packet, packet, with with his his old old flourish, flourish, and and glancing glancing at at the the contents, contents, as as if if he he cherished cherished an an artistic artistic admiration admiration of of their their style style of of composition, composition, he he began began to to read read as as follows: follows: '"dear '"dear miss miss trotwood trotwood and and gentlemen gentlemen -- -- "' "' 'bless 'bless and and save save the the man!' man!' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt aunt in in a a low low voice. voice. 'he'd 'he'd write write letters letters by by the the ream, ream, if if it it was was a a capital capital offence!' offence!' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, without without hearing hearing her, her, went went on. on. '"in '"in appearing appearing before before you to to denounce denounce probably probably the the most most consummate consummate villain villain that that has has ever ever existed,"' existed,"' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, without without looking looking off off the the letter, letter, pointed pointed the the ruler, ruler, like like a a ghostly ghostly truncheon, truncheon, at at uriah uriah heep, heep, '"i '"i ask ask no no consideration consideration for for myself. myself. the the victim, victim, from from my my cradle, cradle, of of pecuniary pecuniary liabilities liabilities to to which which i i have have been been unable unable to to respond, respond, i i have have ever ever been been the the sport sport and and toy toy of of debasing debasing circumstances. circumstances. ignominy, ignominy, want, want, despair, despair, and and madness, madness, have, have, collectively collectively or or separately, separately, been been the the attendants attendants of of my my career."' career."' the the relish relish with with which which mr. mr. micawber micawber described described himself himself as as a a prey prey to to these these dismal dismal calamities, calamities, was was only only to to be be equalled equalled by by the the emphasis emphasis with with which which he he read read his his letter; letter; and and the the kind kind of of homage homage he he rendered rendered to to it it with with a a roll roll of of his his head, head, when when he he thought thought he he had had hit hit a a sentence sentence very very hard hard indeed. indeed. '"in '"in an an accumulation accumulation of of ignominy, ignominy, want, want, despair, despair, and and madness, madness, i i entered entered the the office office -- -- or, or, as as our our lively lively neighbour neighbour the the gaul gaul would would term term it, it, the the bureau bureau -- -- of of the the firm, firm, nominally nominally conducted conducted under under the the appellation appellation of of wickfield wickfield and and -- -- heep, heep, but but in in reality, reality, wielded wielded by by -- -- heep heep alone. alone. heep, heep, and and only only heep, heep, is is the the mainspring mainspring of of that that machine. machine. heep, heep, and and only only heep, heep, is is the the forger forger and and the the cheat."' cheat."' uriah, uriah, more more blue blue than than white white at at these these words, words, made made a a dart dart at at the the letter, letter, as as if if to to tear tear it it in in pieces. pieces. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a perfect perfect miracle miracle of of dexterity dexterity or or luck, luck, caught caught his his advancing advancing knuckles knuckles with with the the ruler, ruler, and and disabled disabled his his right right hand. hand. it it dropped dropped at at the the wrist, wrist, as as if if it it were were broken. broken. the the blow blow sounded sounded as as if if it it had had fallen fallen on on wood. wood. 'the 'the devil devil take take you!' said said uriah, uriah, writhing writhing in in a a new new way way with with pain. pain. 'i'll 'i'll be be even even with with you.' 'approach 'approach me me again, again, you -- -- you -- -- you heep heep of of infamy,' infamy,' gasped gasped mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'and 'and if if your your head head is is human, human, i'll i'll break break it. it. come come on, on, come come on!' on!' i i think think i i never never saw saw anything anything more more ridiculous ridiculous -- -- i i was was sensible sensible of of it, it, even even at at the the time time -- -- than than mr. mr. micawber micawber making making broad-sword broad-sword guards guards with with the the ruler, ruler, and and crying, crying, 'come 'come on!' on!' while while traddles traddles and and i i pushed pushed him him back back into into a a corner, corner, from from which, which, as as often often as as we we got got him him into into it, it, he he persisted persisted in in emerging emerging again. again. his his enemy, enemy, muttering muttering to to himself, himself, after after wringing wringing his his wounded wounded hand hand for for sometime, sometime, slowly slowly drew drew off off his his neck-kerchief neck-kerchief and and bound bound it it up; up; then then held held it it in in his his other other hand, hand, and and sat sat upon upon his his table table with with his his sullen sullen face face looking looking down. down. mr. mr. micawber, micawber, when when he he was was sufficiently sufficiently cool, cool, proceeded proceeded with with his his letter. letter. '"the '"the stipendiary stipendiary emoluments emoluments in in consideration consideration of of which which i i entered entered into into the the service service of of -- -- heep,"' heep,"' always always pausing pausing before before that that word word and and uttering uttering it it with with astonishing astonishing vigour, vigour, '"were '"were not not defined, defined, beyond beyond the the pittance pittance of of twenty-two twenty-two shillings shillings and and six six per per week. week. the the rest rest was was left left contingent contingent on on the the value value of of my my professional professional exertions; exertions; in in other other and and more more expressive expressive words, words, on on the the baseness baseness of of my my nature, nature, the the cupidity cupidity of of my my motives, motives, the the poverty poverty of of my my family, family, the the general general moral moral (or (or rather rather immoral) immoral) resemblance resemblance between between myself myself and and -- -- heep. heep. need need i i say, say, that that it it soon soon became became necessary necessary for for me me to to solicit solicit from from -- -- heep heep -- -- pecuniary pecuniary advances advances towards towards the the support support of of mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, and and our our blighted blighted but but rising rising family? family? need need i i say say that that this this necessity necessity had had been been foreseen foreseen by by -- -- heep? heep? that that those those advances advances were were secured secured by by i.o.u.'s i.o.u.'s and and other other similar similar acknowledgements, acknowledgements, known known to to the the legal legal institutions institutions of of this this country? country? and and that that i i thus thus became became immeshed immeshed in in the the web web he he had had spun spun for for my my reception?"' reception?"' mr. mr. micawber's micawber's enjoyment enjoyment of of his his epistolary epistolary powers, powers, in in describing describing this this unfortunate unfortunate state state of of things, things, really really seemed seemed to to outweigh outweigh any any pain pain or or anxiety anxiety that that the the reality reality could could have have caused caused him. him. he he read read on: on: '"then '"then it it was was that that -- -- heep heep -- -- began began to to favour favour me me with with just just so so much much of of his his confidence, confidence, as as was was necessary necessary to to the the discharge discharge of of his his infernal infernal business. business. then then it it was was that that i i began, began, if if i i may may so so shakespearianly shakespearianly express express myself, myself, to to dwindle, dwindle, peak, peak, and and pine. pine. i i found found that that my my services services were were constantly constantly called called into into requisition requisition for for the the falsification falsification of of business, business, and and the the mystification mystification of of an an individual individual whom whom i i will will designate designate as as mr. mr. w. w. that that mr. mr. w. w. was was imposed imposed upon, upon, kept kept in in ignorance, ignorance, and and deluded, deluded, in in every every possible possible way; way; yet, yet, that that all all this this while, while, the the ruffian ruffian -- -- heep heep -- -- was was professing professing unbounded unbounded gratitude gratitude to, to, and and unbounded unbounded friendship friendship for, for, that that much-abused much-abused gentleman. gentleman. this this was was bad bad enough; enough; but, but, as as the the philosophic philosophic dane dane observes, observes, with with that that universal universal applicability applicability which which distinguishes distinguishes the the illustrious illustrious ornament ornament of of the the elizabethan elizabethan era, era, worse worse remains remains behind!"' behind!"' mr. mr. micawber micawber was was so so very very much much struck struck by by this this happy happy rounding rounding off off with with a a quotation, quotation, that that he he indulged indulged himself, himself, and and us, us, with with a a second second reading reading of of the the sentence, sentence, under under pretence pretence of of having having lost lost his his place. place. '"it '"it is is not not my my intention,"' intention,"' he he continued continued reading reading on, on, '"to '"to enter enter on on a a detailed detailed list, list, within within the the compass compass of of the the present present epistle epistle (though (though it it is is ready ready elsewhere), elsewhere), of of the the various various malpractices malpractices of of a a minor minor nature, nature, affecting affecting the the individual individual whom whom i i have have denominated denominated mr. mr. w., w., to to which which i i have have been been a a tacitly tacitly consenting consenting party. party. my my object, object, when when the the contest contest within within myself myself between between stipend stipend and and no no stipend, stipend, baker baker and and no no baker, baker, existence existence and and non-existence, non-existence, ceased, ceased, was was to to take take advantage advantage of of my my opportunities opportunities to to discover discover and and expose expose the the major major malpractices malpractices committed, committed, to to that that gentleman's gentleman's grievous grievous wrong wrong and and injury, injury, by by -- -- heep. heep. stimulated stimulated by by the the silent silent monitor monitor within, within, and and by by a a no no less less touching touching and and appealing appealing monitor monitor without without -- -- to to whom whom i i will will briefly briefly refer refer as as miss miss w. w. -- -- i i entered entered on on a a not not unlaborious unlaborious task task of of clandestine clandestine investigation, investigation, protracted protracted -- -- now, now, to to the the best best of of my my knowledge, knowledge, information, information, and and belief, belief, over over a a period period exceeding exceeding twelve twelve calendar calendar months."' months."' he he read read this this passage passage as as if if it it were were from from an an act act of of parliament; parliament; and and appeared appeared majestically majestically refreshed refreshed by by the the sound sound of of the the words. words. '"my '"my charges charges against against -- -- heep,"' heep,"' he he read read on, on, glancing glancing at at him, him, and and drawing drawing the the ruler ruler into into a a convenient convenient position position under under his his left left arm, arm, in in case case of of need, need, '"are '"are as as follows."' follows."' we we all all held held our our breath, breath, i i think. think. i i am am sure sure uriah uriah held held his. his. '"first,"' '"first,"' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, '"when '"when mr. mr. w.'s w.'s faculties faculties and and memory memory for for business business became, became, through through causes causes into into which which it it is is not not necessary necessary or or expedient expedient for for me me to to enter, enter, weakened weakened and and confused, confused, -- -- heep heep -- -- designedly designedly perplexed perplexed and and complicated complicated the the whole whole of of the the official official transactions. transactions. when when mr. mr. w. w. was was least least fit fit to to enter enter on on business, business, -- -- heep heep was was always always at at hand hand to to force force him him to to enter enter on on it. it. he he obtained obtained mr. mr. w.'s w.'s signature signature under under such such circumstances circumstances to to documents documents of of importance, importance, representing representing them them to to be be other other documents documents of of no no importance. importance. he he induced induced mr. mr. w. w. to to empower empower him him to to draw draw out, out, thus, thus, one one particular particular sum sum of of trust-money, trust-money, amounting amounting to to twelve twelve six six fourteen, fourteen, two two and and nine, nine, and and employed employed it it to to meet meet pretended pretended business business charges charges and and deficiencies deficiencies which which were were either either already already provided provided for, for, or or had had never never really really existed. existed. he he gave gave this this proceeding, proceeding, throughout, throughout, the the appearance appearance of of having having originated originated in in mr. mr. w.'s w.'s own own dishonest dishonest intention, intention, and and of of having having been been accomplished accomplished by by mr. mr. w.'s w.'s own own dishonest dishonest act; act; and and has has used used it, it, ever ever since, since, to to torture torture and and constrain constrain him."' him."' 'you shall shall prove prove this, this, you copperfield!' copperfield!' said said uriah, uriah, with with a a threatening threatening shake shake of of the the head. head. 'all 'all in in good good time!' time!' 'ask 'ask -- -- heep heep -- -- mr. mr. traddles, traddles, who who lived lived in in his his house house after after him,' him,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, breaking breaking off off from from the the letter; letter; 'will 'will you?' 'the 'the fool fool himself himself -- -- and and lives lives there there now,' now,' said said uriah, uriah, disdainfully. disdainfully. 'ask 'ask -- -- heep heep -- -- if if he he ever ever kept kept a a pocket-book pocket-book in in that that house,' house,' said said mr. mr. micawber; micawber; 'will 'will you?' i i saw saw uriah's uriah's lank lank hand hand stop, stop, involuntarily, involuntarily, in in the the scraping scraping of of his his chin. chin. 'or 'or ask ask him,' him,' said said mr. mr. micawber,'if micawber,'if he he ever ever burnt burnt one one there. there. if if he he says says yes, yes, and and asks asks you where where the the ashes ashes are, are, refer refer him him to to wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, and and he he will will hear hear of of something something not not at at all all to to his his advantage!' advantage!' the the triumphant triumphant flourish flourish with with which which mr. mr. micawber micawber delivered delivered himself himself of of these these words, words, had had a a powerful powerful effect effect in in alarming alarming the the mother; mother; who who cried cried out, out, in in much much agitation: agitation: 'ury, 'ury, ury! ury! be be umble, umble, and and make make terms, terms, my my dear!' dear!' 'mother!' 'mother!' he he retorted, retorted, 'will 'will you keep keep quiet? quiet? you're you're in in a a fright, fright, and and don't don't know know what what you say say or or mean. mean. umble!' umble!' he he repeated, repeated, looking looking at at me, me, with with a a snarl; snarl; 'i've 'i've umbled umbled some some of of 'em 'em for for a a pretty pretty long long time time back, back, umble umble as as i i was!' was!' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, genteelly genteelly adjusting adjusting his his chin chin in in his his cravat, cravat, presently presently proceeded proceeded with with his his composition. composition. '"second. '"second. heep heep has, has, on on several several occasions, occasions, to to the the best best of of my my knowledge, knowledge, information, information, and and belief belief -- -- "' "' 'but 'but that that won't won't do,' do,' muttered muttered uriah, uriah, relieved. relieved. 'mother, 'mother, you keep keep quiet.' quiet.' 'we 'we will will endeavour endeavour to to provide provide something something that that will will do, do, and and do do for for you finally, finally, sir, sir, very very shortly,' shortly,' replied replied mr. mr. micawber. micawber. '"second. '"second. heep heep has, has, on on several several occasions, occasions, to to the the best best of of my my knowledge, knowledge, information, information, and and belief, belief, systematically systematically forged, forged, to to various various entries, entries, books, books, and and documents, documents, the the signature signature of of mr. mr. w.; w.; and and has has distinctly distinctly done done so so in in one one instance, instance, capable capable of of proof proof by by me. me. to to wit, wit, in in manner manner following, following, that that is is to to say:"' say:"' again, again, mr. mr. micawber micawber had had a a relish relish in in this this formal formal piling piling up up of of words, words, which, which, however however ludicrously ludicrously displayed displayed in in his his case, case, was, was, i i must must say, say, not not at at all all peculiar peculiar to to him. him. i i have have observed observed it, it, in in the the course course of of my my life, life, in in numbers numbers of of men. men. it it seems seems to to me me to to be be a a general general rule. rule. in in the the taking taking of of legal legal oaths, oaths, for for instance, instance, deponents deponents seem seem to to enjoy enjoy themselves themselves mightily mightily when when they they come come to to several several good good words words in in succession, succession, for for the the expression expression of of one one idea; idea; as, as, that that they they utterly utterly detest, detest, abominate, abominate, and and abjure, abjure, or or so so forth; forth; and and the the old old anathemas anathemas were were made made relishing relishing on on the the same same principle. principle. we we talk talk about about the the tyranny tyranny of of words, words, but but we we like like to to tyrannize tyrannize over over them them too; too; we we are are fond fond of of having having a a large large superfluous superfluous establishment establishment of of words words to to wait wait upon upon us us on on great great occasions; occasions; we we think think it it looks looks important, important, and and sounds sounds well. well. as as we we are are not not particular particular about about the the meaning meaning of of our our liveries liveries on on state state occasions, occasions, if if they they be be but but fine fine and and numerous numerous enough, enough, so, so, the the meaning meaning or or necessity necessity of of our our words words is is a a secondary secondary consideration, consideration, if if there there be be but but a a great great parade parade of of them. them. and and as as individuals individuals get get into into trouble trouble by by making making too too great great a a show show of of liveries, liveries, or or as as slaves slaves when when they they are are too too numerous numerous rise rise against against their their masters, masters, so so i i think think i i could could mention mention a a nation nation that that has has got got into into many many great great difficulties, difficulties, and and will will get get into into many many greater, greater, from from maintaining maintaining too too large large a a retinue retinue of of words. words. mr. mr. micawber micawber read read on, on, almost almost smacking smacking his his lips: lips: '"to '"to wit, wit, in in manner manner following, following, that that is is to to say. say. mr. mr. w. w. being being infirm, infirm, and and it it being being within within the the bounds bounds of of probability probability that that his his decease decease might might lead lead to to some some discoveries, discoveries, and and to to the the downfall downfall of of -- -- heep's heep's -- -- power power over over the the w. w. family, family, -- -- as as i, i, wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, the the undersigned, undersigned, assume assume -- -- unless unless the the filial filial affection affection of of his his daughter daughter could could be be secretly secretly influenced influenced from from allowing allowing any any investigation investigation of of the the partnership partnership affairs affairs to to be be ever ever made, made, the the said said -- -- heep heep -- -- deemed deemed it it expedient expedient to to have have a a bond bond ready ready by by him, him, as as from from mr. mr. w., w., for for the the before-mentioned before-mentioned sum sum of of twelve twelve six six fourteen, fourteen, two two and and nine, nine, with with interest, interest, stated stated therein therein to to have have been been advanced advanced by by -- -- heep heep -- -- to to mr. mr. w. w. to to save save mr. mr. w. w. from from dishonour; dishonour; though though really really the the sum sum was was never never advanced advanced by by him, him, and and has has long long been been replaced. replaced. the the signatures signatures to to this this instrument instrument purporting purporting to to be be executed executed by by mr. mr. w. w. and and attested attested by by wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, are are forgeries forgeries by by -- -- heep. heep. i i have, have, in in my my possession, possession, in in his his hand hand and and pocket-book, pocket-book, several several similar similar imitations imitations of of mr. mr. w.'s w.'s signature, signature, here here and and there there defaced defaced by by fire, fire, but but legible legible to to anyone. anyone. i i never never attested attested any any such such document. document. and and i i have have the the document document itself, itself, in in my my possession."' possession."' uriah uriah heep, heep, with with a a start, start, took took out out of of his his pocket pocket a a bunch bunch of of keys, keys, and and opened opened a a certain certain drawer; drawer; then, then, suddenly suddenly bethought bethought himself himself of of what what he he was was about, about, and and turned turned again again towards towards us, us, without without looking looking in in it. it. '"and '"and i i have have the the document,"' document,"' mr. mr. micawber micawber read read again, again, looking looking about about as as if if it it were were the the text text of of a a sermon, sermon, '"in '"in my my possession, possession, -- -- that that is is to to say, say, i i had, had, early early this this morning, morning, when when this this was was written, written, but but have have since since relinquished relinquished it it to to mr. mr. traddles."' traddles."' 'it 'it is is quite quite true,' true,' assented assented traddles. traddles. 'ury, 'ury, ury!' ury!' cried cried the the mother, mother, 'be 'be umble umble and and make make terms. terms. i i know know my my son son will will be be umble, umble, gentlemen, gentlemen, if if you'll you'll give give him him time time to to think. think. mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i'm i'm sure sure you know know that that he he was was always always very very umble, umble, sir!' sir!' it it was was singular singular to to see see how how the the mother mother still still held held to to the the old old trick, trick, when when the the son son had had abandoned abandoned it it as as useless. useless. 'mother,' 'mother,' he he said, said, with with an an impatient impatient bite bite at at the the handkerchief handkerchief in in which which his his hand hand was was wrapped, wrapped, 'you had had better better take take and and fire fire a a loaded loaded gun gun at at me.' me.' 'but 'but i i love love you, ury,' ury,' cried cried mrs. mrs. heep. heep. and and i i have have no no doubt doubt she she did; did; or or that that he he loved loved her, her, however however strange strange it it may may appear; appear; though, though, to to be be sure, sure, they they were were a a congenial congenial couple. couple. 'and 'and i i can't can't bear bear to to hear hear you provoking provoking the the gentlemen, gentlemen, and and endangering endangering of of yourself yourself more. more. i i told told the the gentleman gentleman at at first, first, when when he he told told me me upstairs upstairs it it was was come come to to light, light, that that i i would would answer answer for for your your being being umble, umble, and and making making amends. amends. oh, oh, see see how how umble umble i i am, am, gentlemen, gentlemen, and and don't don't mind mind him!' him!' 'why, 'why, there's there's copperfield, copperfield, mother,' mother,' he he angrily angrily retorted, retorted, pointing pointing his his lean lean finger finger at at me, me, against against whom whom all all his his animosity animosity was was levelled, levelled, as as the the prime prime mover mover in in the the discovery; discovery; and and i i did did not not undeceive undeceive him; him; 'there's 'there's copperfield, copperfield, would would have have given given you a a hundred hundred pound pound to to say say less less than than you've you've blurted blurted out!' out!' 'i 'i can't can't help help it, it, ury,' ury,' cried cried his his mother. mother. 'i 'i can't can't see see you running running into into danger, danger, through through carrying carrying your your head head so so high. high. better better be be umble, umble, as as you always always was.' was.' he he remained remained for for a a little, little, biting biting the the handkerchief, handkerchief, and and then then said said to to me me with with a a scowl: scowl: 'what 'what more more have have you got got to to bring bring forward? forward? if if anything, anything, go go on on with with it. it. what what do do you look look at at me me for?' for?' mr. mr. micawber micawber promptly promptly resumed resumed his his letter, letter, glad glad to to revert revert to to a a performance performance with with which which he he was was so so highly highly satisfied. satisfied. '"third. '"third. and and last. last. i i am am now now in in a a condition condition to to show, show, by by -- -- heep's heep's -- -- false false books, books, and and -- -- heep's heep's -- -- real real memoranda, memoranda, beginning beginning with with the the partially partially destroyed destroyed pocket-book pocket-book (which (which i i was was unable unable to to comprehend, comprehend, at at the the time time of of its its accidental accidental discovery discovery by by mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, on on our our taking taking possession possession of of our our present present abode, abode, in in the the locker locker or or bin bin devoted devoted to to the the reception reception of of the the ashes ashes calcined calcined on on our our domestic domestic hearth), hearth), that that the the weaknesses, weaknesses, the the faults, faults, the the very very virtues, virtues, the the parental parental affections, affections, and and the the sense sense of of honour, honour, of of the the unhappy unhappy mr. mr. w. w. have have been been for for years years acted acted on on by, by, and and warped warped to to the the base base purposes purposes of of -- -- heep. heep. that that mr. mr. w. w. has has been been for for years years deluded deluded and and plundered, plundered, in in every every conceivable conceivable manner, manner, to to the the pecuniary pecuniary aggrandisement aggrandisement of of the the avaricious, avaricious, false, false, and and grasping grasping -- -- heep. heep. that that the the engrossing engrossing object object of of -- -- heep heep -- -- was, was, next next to to gain, gain, to to subdue subdue mr. mr. and and miss miss w. w. (of (of his his ulterior ulterior views views in in reference reference to to the the latter latter i i say say nothing) nothing) entirely entirely to to himself. himself. that that his his last last act, act, completed completed but but a a few few months months since, since, was was to to induce induce mr. mr. w. w. to to execute execute a a relinquishment relinquishment of of his his share share in in the the partnership, partnership, and and even even a a bill bill of of sale sale on on the the very very furniture furniture of of his his house, house, in in consideration consideration of of a a certain certain annuity, annuity, to to be be well well and and truly truly paid paid by by -- -- heep heep -- -- on on the the four four common common quarter-days quarter-days in in each each and and every every year. year. that that these these meshes; meshes; beginning beginning with with alarming alarming and and falsified falsified accounts accounts of of the the estate estate of of which which mr. mr. w. w. is is the the receiver, receiver, at at a a period period when when mr. mr. w. w. had had launched launched into into imprudent imprudent and and ill-judged ill-judged speculations, speculations, and and may may not not have have had had the the money, money, for for which which he he was was morally morally and and legally legally responsible, responsible, in in hand; hand; going going on on with with pretended pretended borrowings borrowings of of money money at at enormous enormous interest, interest, really really coming coming from from -- -- heep heep -- -- and and by by -- -- heep heep -- -- fraudulently fraudulently obtained obtained or or withheld withheld from from mr. mr. w. w. himself, himself, on on pretence pretence of of such such speculations speculations or or otherwise; otherwise; perpetuated perpetuated by by a a miscellaneous miscellaneous catalogue catalogue of of unscrupulous unscrupulous chicaneries chicaneries -- -- gradually gradually thickened, thickened, until until the the unhappy unhappy mr. mr. w. w. could could see see no no world world beyond. beyond. bankrupt, bankrupt, as as he he believed, believed, alike alike in in circumstances, circumstances, in in all all other other hope, hope, and and in in honour, honour, his his sole sole reliance reliance was was upon upon the the monster monster in in the the garb garb of of man,"' man,"' -- -- mr. mr. micawber micawber made made a a good good deal deal of of this, this, as as a a new new turn turn of of expression, expression, -- -- '"who, '"who, by by making making himself himself necessary necessary to to him, him, had had achieved achieved his his destruction. destruction. all all this this i i undertake undertake to to show. show. probably probably much much more!"' more!"' i i whispered whispered a a few few words words to to agnes, agnes, who who was was weeping, weeping, half half joyfully, joyfully, half half sorrowfully, sorrowfully, at at my my side; side; and and there there was was a a movement movement among among us, us, as as if if mr. mr. micawber micawber had had finished. finished. he he said, said, with with exceeding exceeding gravity, gravity, 'pardon 'pardon me,' me,' and and proceeded, proceeded, with with a a mixture mixture of of the the lowest lowest spirits spirits and and the the most most intense intense enjoyment, enjoyment, to to the the peroration peroration of of his his letter. letter. '"i '"i have have now now concluded. concluded. it it merely merely remains remains for for me me to to substantiate substantiate these these accusations; accusations; and and then, then, with with my my ill-starred ill-starred family, family, to to disappear disappear from from the the landscape landscape on on which which we we appear appear to to be be an an encumbrance. encumbrance. that that is is soon soon done. done. it it may may be be reasonably reasonably inferred inferred that that our our baby baby will will first first expire expire of of inanition, inanition, as as being being the the frailest frailest member member of of our our circle; circle; and and that that our our twins twins will will follow follow next next in in order. order. so so be be it! it! for for myself, myself, my my canterbury canterbury pilgrimage pilgrimage has has done done much; much; imprisonment imprisonment on on civil civil process, process, and and want, want, will will soon soon do do more. more. i i trust trust that that the the labour labour and and hazard hazard of of an an investigation investigation -- -- of of which which the the smallest smallest results results have have been been slowly slowly pieced pieced together, together, in in the the pressure pressure of of arduous arduous avocations, avocations, under under grinding grinding penurious penurious apprehensions, apprehensions, at at rise rise of of morn, morn, at at dewy dewy eve, eve, in in the the shadows shadows of of night, night, under under the the watchful watchful eye eye of of one one whom whom it it were were superfluous superfluous to to call call demon demon -- -- combined combined with with the the struggle struggle of of parental parental poverty poverty to to turn turn it, it, when when completed, completed, to to the the right right account, account, may may be be as as the the sprinkling sprinkling of of a a few few drops drops of of sweet sweet water water on on my my funeral funeral pyre. pyre. i i ask ask no no more. more. let let it it be, be, in in justice, justice, merely merely said said of of me, me, as as of of a a gallant gallant and and eminent eminent naval naval hero, hero, with with whom whom i i have have no no pretensions pretensions to to cope, cope, that that what what i i have have done, done, i i did, did, in in despite despite of of mercenary mercenary and and selfish selfish objects, objects, for for england, england, home, home, and and beauty. beauty. '"remaining '"remaining always, always, &c. &c. &c., &c., wilkins wilkins micawber."' micawber."' much much affected, affected, but but still still intensely intensely enjoying enjoying himself, himself, mr. mr. micawber micawber folded folded up up his his letter, letter, and and handed handed it it with with a a bow bow to to my my aunt, aunt, as as something something she she might might like like to to keep. keep. there there was, was, as as i i had had noticed noticed on on my my first first visit visit long long ago, ago, an an iron iron safe safe in in the the room. room. the the key key was was in in it. it. a a hasty hasty suspicion suspicion seemed seemed to to strike strike uriah; uriah; and, and, with with a a glance glance at at mr. mr. micawber, micawber, he he went went to to it, it, and and threw threw the the doors doors clanking clanking open. open. it it was was empty. empty. 'where 'where are are the the books?' books?' he he cried, cried, with with a a frightful frightful face. face. 'some 'some thief thief has has stolen stolen the the books!' books!' mr. mr. micawber micawber tapped tapped himself himself with with the the ruler. ruler. 'i 'i did, did, when when i i got got the the key key from from you as as usual usual -- -- but but a a little little earlier earlier -- -- and and opened opened it it this this morning.' morning.' 'don't 'don't be be uneasy,' uneasy,' said said traddles. traddles. 'they 'they have have come come into into my my possession. possession. i i will will take take care care of of them, them, under under the the authority authority i i mentioned.' mentioned.' 'you receive receive stolen stolen goods, goods, do do you?' cried cried uriah. uriah. 'under 'under such such circumstances,' circumstances,' answered answered traddles, traddles, 'yes.' 'yes.' what what was was my my astonishment astonishment when when i i beheld beheld my my aunt, aunt, who who had had been been profoundly profoundly quiet quiet and and attentive, attentive, make make a a dart dart at at uriah uriah heep, heep, and and seize seize him him by by the the collar collar with with both both hands! hands! 'you know know what what i i want?' want?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'a 'a strait-waistcoat,' strait-waistcoat,' said said he. he. 'no. 'no. my my property!' property!' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'agnes, 'agnes, my my dear, dear, as as long long as as i i believed believed it it had had been been really really made made away away with with by by your your father, father, i i wouldn't wouldn't -- -- and, and, my my dear, dear, i i didn't, didn't, even even to to trot, trot, as as he he knows knows -- -- breathe breathe a a syllable syllable of of its its having having been been placed placed here here for for investment. investment. but, but, now now i i know know this this fellow's fellow's answerable answerable for for it, it, and and i'll i'll have have it! it! trot, trot, come come and and take take it it away away from from him!' him!' whether whether my my aunt aunt supposed, supposed, for for the the moment, moment, that that he he kept kept her her property property in in his his neck-kerchief, neck-kerchief, i i am am sure sure i i don't don't know; know; but but she she certainly certainly pulled pulled at at it it as as if if she she thought thought so. so. i i hastened hastened to to put put myself myself between between them, them, and and to to assure assure her her that that we we would would all all take take care care that that he he should should make make the the utmost utmost restitution restitution of of everything everything he he had had wrongly wrongly got. got. this, this, and and a a few few moments' moments' reflection, reflection, pacified pacified her; her; but but she she was was not not at at all all disconcerted disconcerted by by what what she she had had done done (though (though i i cannot cannot say say as as much much for for her her bonnet) bonnet) and and resumed resumed her her seat seat composedly. composedly. during during the the last last few few minutes, minutes, mrs. mrs. heep heep had had been been clamouring clamouring to to her her son son to to be be 'umble'; 'umble'; and and had had been been going going down down on on her her knees knees to to all all of of us us in in succession, succession, and and making making the the wildest wildest promises. promises. her her son son sat sat her her down down in in his his chair; chair; and, and, standing standing sulkily sulkily by by her, her, holding holding her her arm arm with with his his hand, hand, but but not not rudely, rudely, said said to to me, me, with with a a ferocious ferocious look: look: 'what 'what do do you want want done?' done?' 'i 'i will will tell tell you what what must must be be done,' done,' said said traddles. traddles. 'has 'has that that copperfield copperfield no no tongue?' tongue?' muttered muttered uriah, uriah, 'i 'i would would do do a a good good deal deal for for you if if you could could tell tell me, me, without without lying, lying, that that somebody somebody had had cut cut it it out.' out.' 'my 'my uriah uriah means means to to be be umble!' umble!' cried cried his his mother. mother. 'don't 'don't mind mind what what he he says, says, good good gentlemen!' gentlemen!' 'what 'what must must be be done,' done,' said said traddles, traddles, 'is 'is this. this. first, first, the the deed deed of of relinquishment, relinquishment, that that we we have have heard heard of, of, must must be be given given over over to to me me now now -- -- here.' here.' 'suppose 'suppose i i haven't haven't got got it,' it,' he he interrupted. interrupted. 'but 'but you have,' have,' said said traddles; traddles; 'therefore, 'therefore, you know, know, we we won't won't suppose suppose so.' so.' and and i i cannot cannot help help avowing avowing that that this this was was the the first first occasion occasion on on which which i i really really did did justice justice to to the the clear clear head, head, and and the the plain, plain, patient, patient, practical practical good good sense, sense, of of my my old old schoolfellow. schoolfellow. 'then,' 'then,' said said traddles, traddles, 'you must must prepare prepare to to disgorge disgorge all all that that your your rapacity rapacity has has become become possessed possessed of, of, and and to to make make restoration restoration to to the the last last farthing. farthing. all all the the partnership partnership books books and and papers papers must must remain remain in in our our possession; possession; all all your your books books and and papers; papers; all all money money accounts accounts and and securities, securities, of of both both kinds. kinds. in in short, short, everything everything here.' here.' 'must 'must it? it? i i don't don't know know that,' that,' said said uriah. uriah. 'i 'i must must have have time time to to think think about about that.' that.' 'certainly,' 'certainly,' replied replied traddles; traddles; 'but, 'but, in in the the meanwhile, meanwhile, and and until until everything everything is is done done to to our our satisfaction, satisfaction, we we shall shall maintain maintain possession possession of of these these things; things; and and beg beg you -- -- in in short, short, compel compel you -- -- to to keep keep to to your your own own room, room, and and hold hold no no communication communication with with anyone.' anyone.' 'i 'i won't won't do do it!' it!' said said uriah, uriah, with with an an oath. oath. 'maidstone 'maidstone jail jail is is a a safer safer place place of of detention,' detention,' observed observed traddles; traddles; 'and 'and though though the the law law may may be be longer longer in in righting righting us, us, and and may may not not be be able able to to right right us us so so completely completely as as you can, can, there there is is no no doubt doubt of of its its punishing punishing you. dear dear me, me, you know know that that quite quite as as well well as as i! i! copperfield, copperfield, will will you go go round round to to the the guildhall, guildhall, and and bring bring a a couple couple of of officers?' officers?' here, here, mrs. mrs. heep heep broke broke out out again, again, crying crying on on her her knees knees to to agnes agnes to to interfere interfere in in their their behalf, behalf, exclaiming exclaiming that that he he was was very very humble, humble, and and it it was was all all true, true, and and if if he he didn't didn't do do what what we we wanted, wanted, she she would, would, and and much much more more to to the the same same purpose; purpose; being being half half frantic frantic with with fears fears for for her her darling. darling. to to inquire inquire what what he he might might have have done, done, if if he he had had had had any any boldness, boldness, would would be be like like inquiring inquiring what what a a mongrel mongrel cur cur might might do, do, if if it it had had the the spirit spirit of of a a tiger. tiger. he he was was a a coward, coward, from from head head to to foot; foot; and and showed showed his his dastardly dastardly nature nature through through his his sullenness sullenness and and mortification, mortification, as as much much as as at at any any time time of of his his mean mean life. life. 'stop!' 'stop!' he he growled growled to to me; me; and and wiped wiped his his hot hot face face with with his his hand. hand. 'mother, 'mother, hold hold your your noise. noise. well! well! let let 'em 'em have have that that deed. deed. go go and and fetch fetch it!' it!' 'do 'do you help help her, her, mr. mr. dick,' dick,' said said traddles, traddles, 'if 'if you please.' please.' proud proud of of his his commission, commission, and and understanding understanding it, it, mr. mr. dick dick accompanied accompanied her her as as a a shepherd's shepherd's dog dog might might accompany accompany a a sheep. sheep. but, but, mrs. mrs. heep heep gave gave him him little little trouble; trouble; for for she she not not only only returned returned with with the the deed, deed, but but with with the the box box in in which which it it was, was, where where we we found found a a banker's banker's book book and and some some other other papers papers that that were were afterwards afterwards serviceable. serviceable. 'good!' 'good!' said said traddles, traddles, when when this this was was brought. brought. 'now, 'now, mr. mr. heep, heep, you can can retire retire to to think: think: particularly particularly observing, observing, if if you please, please, that that i i declare declare to to you, on on the the part part of of all all present, present, that that there there is is only only one one thing thing to to be be done; done; that that it it is is what what i i have have explained; explained; and and that that it it must must be be done done without without delay.' delay.' uriah, uriah, without without lifting lifting his his eyes eyes from from the the ground, ground, shuffled shuffled across across the the room room with with his his hand hand to to his his chin, chin, and and pausing pausing at at the the door, door, said: said: 'copperfield, 'copperfield, i i have have always always hated hated you. you've you've always always been been an an upstart, upstart, and and you've you've always always been been against against me.' me.' 'as 'as i i think think i i told told you once once before,' before,' said said i, i, 'it 'it is is you who who have have been, been, in in your your greed greed and and cunning, cunning, against against all all the the world. world. it it may may be be profitable profitable to to you to to reflect, reflect, in in future, future, that that there there never never were were greed greed and and cunning cunning in in the the world world yet, yet, that that did did not not do do too too much, much, and and overreach overreach themselves. themselves. it it is is as as certain certain as as death.' death.' 'or 'or as as certain certain as as they they used used to to teach teach at at school school (the (the same same school school where where i i picked picked up up so so much much umbleness), umbleness), from from nine nine o'clock o'clock to to eleven, eleven, that that labour labour was was a a curse; curse; and and from from eleven eleven o'clock o'clock to to one, one, that that it it was was a a blessing blessing and and a a cheerfulness, cheerfulness, and and a a dignity, dignity, and and i i don't don't know know what what all, all, eh?' eh?' said said he he with with a a sneer. sneer. 'you preach, preach, about about as as consistent consistent as as they they did. did. won't won't umbleness umbleness go go down? down? i i shouldn't shouldn't have have got got round round my my gentleman gentleman fellow-partner fellow-partner without without it, it, i i think. think. -- -- micawber, micawber, you old old bully, bully, i'll i'll pay pay you!' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, supremely supremely defiant defiant of of him him and and his his extended extended finger, finger, and and making making a a great great deal deal of of his his chest chest until until he he had had slunk slunk out out at at the the door, door, then then addressed addressed himself himself to to me, me, and and proffered proffered me me the the satisfaction satisfaction of of 'witnessing 'witnessing the the re-establishment re-establishment of of mutual mutual confidence confidence between between himself himself and and mrs. mrs. micawber'. micawber'. after after which, which, he he invited invited the the company company generally generally to to the the contemplation contemplation of of that that affecting affecting spectacle. spectacle. 'the 'the veil veil that that has has long long been been interposed interposed between between mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and myself, myself, is is now now withdrawn,' withdrawn,' said said mr. mr. micawber; micawber; 'and 'and my my children children and and the the author author of of their their being being can can once once more more come come in in contact contact on on equal equal terms.' terms.' as as we we were were all all very very grateful grateful to to him, him, and and all all desirous desirous to to show show that that we we were, were, as as well well as as the the hurry hurry and and disorder disorder of of our our spirits spirits would would permit, permit, i i dare dare say say we we should should all all have have gone, gone, but but that that it it was was necessary necessary for for agnes agnes to to return return to to her her father, father, as as yet yet unable unable to to bear bear more more than than the the dawn dawn of of hope; hope; and and for for someone someone else else to to hold hold uriah uriah in in safe safe keeping. keeping. so, so, traddles traddles remained remained for for the the latter latter purpose, purpose, to to be be presently presently relieved relieved by by mr. mr. dick; dick; and and mr. mr. dick, dick, my my aunt, aunt, and and i, i, went went home home with with mr. mr. micawber. micawber. as as i i parted parted hurriedly hurriedly from from the the dear dear girl girl to to whom whom i i owed owed so so much, much, and and thought thought from from what what she she had had been been saved, saved, perhaps, perhaps, that that morning morning -- -- her her better better resolution resolution notwithstanding notwithstanding -- -- i i felt felt devoutly devoutly thankful thankful for for the the miseries miseries of of my my younger younger days days which which had had brought brought me me to to the the knowledge knowledge of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. his his house house was was not not far far off; off; and and as as the the street street door door opened opened into into the the sitting-room, sitting-room, and and he he bolted bolted in in with with a a precipitation precipitation quite quite his his own, own, we we found found ourselves ourselves at at once once in in the the bosom bosom of of the the family. family. mr. mr. micawber micawber exclaiming, exclaiming, 'emma! 'emma! my my life!' life!' rushed rushed into into mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's arms. arms. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber shrieked, shrieked, and and folded folded mr. mr. micawber micawber in in her her embrace. embrace. miss miss micawber, micawber, nursing nursing the the unconscious unconscious stranger stranger of of mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's last last letter letter to to me, me, was was sensibly sensibly affected. affected. the the stranger stranger leaped. leaped. the the twins twins testified testified their their joy joy by by several several inconvenient inconvenient but but innocent innocent demonstrations. demonstrations. master master micawber, micawber, whose whose disposition disposition appeared appeared to to have have been been soured soured by by early early disappointment, disappointment, and and whose whose aspect aspect had had become become morose, morose, yielded yielded to to his his better better feelings, feelings, and and blubbered. blubbered. 'emma!' 'emma!' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'the 'the cloud cloud is is past past from from my my mind. mind. mutual mutual confidence, confidence, so so long long preserved preserved between between us us once, once, is is restored, restored, to to know know no no further further interruption. interruption. now, now, welcome welcome poverty!' poverty!' cried cried mr. mr. micawber, micawber, shedding shedding tears. tears. 'welcome 'welcome misery, misery, welcome welcome houselessness, houselessness, welcome welcome hunger, hunger, rags, rags, tempest, tempest, and and beggary! beggary! mutual mutual confidence confidence will will sustain sustain us us to to the the end!' end!' with with these these expressions, expressions, mr. mr. micawber micawber placed placed mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in a a chair, chair, and and embraced embraced the the family family all all round; round; welcoming welcoming a a variety variety of of bleak bleak prospects, prospects, which which appeared, appeared, to to the the best best of of my my judgement, judgement, to to be be anything anything but but welcome welcome to to them; them; and and calling calling upon upon them them to to come come out out into into canterbury canterbury and and sing sing a a chorus, chorus, as as nothing nothing else else was was left left for for their their support. support. but but mrs. mrs. micawber micawber having, having, in in the the strength strength of of her her emotions, emotions, fainted fainted away, away, the the first first thing thing to to be be done, done, even even before before the the chorus chorus could could be be considered considered complete, complete, was was to to recover recover her. her. this this my my aunt aunt and and mr. mr. micawber micawber did; did; and and then then my my aunt aunt was was introduced, introduced, and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber recognized recognized me. me. 'excuse 'excuse me, me, dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said the the poor poor lady, lady, giving giving me me her her hand, hand, 'but 'but i i am am not not strong; strong; and and the the removal removal of of the the late late misunderstanding misunderstanding between between mr. mr. micawber micawber and and myself myself was was at at first first too too much much for for me.' me.' 'is 'is this this all all your your family, family, ma'am?' ma'am?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'there 'there are are no no more more at at present,' present,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'good 'good gracious, gracious, i i didn't didn't mean mean that, that, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i mean, mean, are are all all these these yours?' yours?' 'madam,' 'madam,' replied replied mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'it 'it is is a a true true bill.' bill.' 'and 'and that that eldest eldest young young gentleman, gentleman, now,' now,' said said my my aunt, aunt, musing, musing, 'what 'what has has he he been been brought brought up up to?' to?' 'it 'it was was my my hope hope when when i i came came here,' here,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'to 'to have have got got wilkins wilkins into into the the church: church: or or perhaps perhaps i i shall shall express express my my meaning meaning more more strictly, strictly, if if i i say say the the choir. choir. but but there there was was no no vacancy vacancy for for a a tenor tenor in in the the venerable venerable pile pile for for which which this this city city is is so so justly justly eminent; eminent; and and he he has has -- -- in in short, short, he he has has contracted contracted a a habit habit of of singing singing in in public-houses, public-houses, rather rather than than in in sacred sacred edifices.' edifices.' 'but 'but he he means means well,' well,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, tenderly. tenderly. 'i 'i dare dare say, say, my my love,' love,' rejoined rejoined mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that he he means means particularly particularly well; well; but but i i have have not not yet yet found found that that he he carries carries out out his his meaning, meaning, in in any any given given direction direction whatsoever.' whatsoever.' master master micawber's micawber's moroseness moroseness of of aspect aspect returned returned upon upon him him again, again, and and he he demanded, demanded, with with some some temper, temper, what what he he was was to to do? do? whether whether he he had had been been born born a a carpenter, carpenter, or or a a coach-painter, coach-painter, any any more more than than he he had had been been born born a a bird? bird? whether whether he he could could go go into into the the next next street, street, and and open open a a chemist's chemist's shop? shop? whether whether he he could could rush rush to to the the next next assizes, assizes, and and proclaim proclaim himself himself a a lawyer? lawyer? whether whether he he could could come come out out by by force force at at the the opera, opera, and and succeed succeed by by violence? violence? whether whether he he could could do do anything, anything, without without being being brought brought up up to to something? something? my my aunt aunt mused mused a a little little while, while, and and then then said: said: 'mr. 'mr. micawber, micawber, i i wonder wonder you have have never never turned turned your your thoughts thoughts to to emigration.' emigration.' 'madam,' 'madam,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'it 'it was was the the dream dream of of my my youth, youth, and and the the fallacious fallacious aspiration aspiration of of my my riper riper years.' years.' i i am am thoroughly thoroughly persuaded, persuaded, by by the the by, by, that that he he had had never never thought thought of of it it in in his his life. life. 'aye?' 'aye?' said said my my aunt, aunt, with with a a glance glance at at me. me. 'why, 'why, what what a a thing thing it it would would be be for for yourselves yourselves and and your your family, family, mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, if if you were were to to emigrate emigrate now.' now.' 'capital, 'capital, madam, madam, capital,' capital,' urged urged mr. mr. micawber, micawber, gloomily. gloomily. 'that 'that is is the the principal, principal, i i may may say say the the only only difficulty, difficulty, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' assented assented his his wife. wife. 'capital?' 'capital?' cried cried my my aunt. aunt. 'but 'but you are are doing doing us us a a great great service service -- -- have have done done us us a a great great service, service, i i may may say, say, for for surely surely much much will will come come out out of of the the fire fire -- -- and and what what could could we we do do for for you, that that would would be be half half so so good good as as to to find find the the capital?' capital?' 'i 'i could could not not receive receive it it as as a a gift,' gift,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, full full of of fire fire and and animation, animation, 'but 'but if if a a sufficient sufficient sum sum could could be be advanced, advanced, say say at at five five per per cent cent interest, interest, per per annum, annum, upon upon my my personal personal liability liability -- -- say say my my notes notes of of hand, hand, at at twelve, twelve, eighteen, eighteen, and and twenty-four twenty-four months, months, respectively, respectively, to to allow allow time time for for something something to to turn turn up up -- -- ' ' 'could 'could be? be? can can be be and and shall shall be, be, on on your your own own terms,' terms,' returned returned my my aunt, aunt, 'if 'if you say say the the word. word. think think of of this this now, now, both both of of you. here here are are some some people people david david knows, knows, going going out out to to australia australia shortly. shortly. if if you decide decide to to go, go, why why shouldn't shouldn't you go go in in the the same same ship? ship? you may may help help each each other. other. think think of of this this now, now, mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. take take your your time, time, and and weigh weigh it it well.' well.' 'there 'there is is but but one one question, question, my my dear dear ma'am, ma'am, i i could could wish wish to to ask,' ask,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'the 'the climate, climate, i i believe, believe, is is healthy?' healthy?' 'finest 'finest in in the the world!' world!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'just 'just so,' so,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'then 'then my my question question arises. arises. now, now, are are the the circumstances circumstances of of the the country country such, such, that that a a man man of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities abilities would would have have a a fair fair chance chance of of rising rising in in the the social social scale? scale? i i will will not not say, say, at at present, present, might might he he aspire aspire to to be be governor, governor, or or anything anything of of that that sort; sort; but but would would there there be be a a reasonable reasonable opening opening for for his his talents talents to to develop develop themselves themselves -- -- that that would would be be amply amply sufficient sufficient -- -- and and find find their their own own expansion?' expansion?' 'no 'no better better opening opening anywhere,' anywhere,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'for 'for a a man man who who conducts conducts himself himself well, well, and and is is industrious.' industrious.' 'for 'for a a man man who who conducts conducts himself himself well,' well,' repeated repeated mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, with with her her clearest clearest business business manner, manner, 'and 'and is is industrious. industrious. precisely. precisely. it it is is evident evident to to me me that that australia australia is is the the legitimate legitimate sphere sphere of of action action for for mr. mr. micawber!' micawber!' 'i 'i entertain entertain the the conviction, conviction, my my dear dear madam,' madam,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that it it is, is, under under existing existing circumstances, circumstances, the the land, land, the the only only land, land, for for myself myself and and family; family; and and that that something something of of an an extraordinary extraordinary nature nature will will turn turn up up on on that that shore. shore. it it is is no no distance distance -- -- comparatively comparatively speaking; speaking; and and though though consideration consideration is is due due to to the the kindness kindness of of your your proposal, proposal, i i assure assure you that that is is a a mere mere matter matter of of form.' form.' shall shall i i ever ever forget forget how, how, in in a a moment, moment, he he was was the the most most sanguine sanguine of of men, men, looking looking on on to to fortune; fortune; or or how how mrs. mrs. micawber micawber presently presently discoursed discoursed about about the the habits habits of of the the kangaroo! kangaroo! shall shall i i ever ever recall recall that that street street of of canterbury canterbury on on a a market-day, market-day, without without recalling recalling him, him, as as he he walked walked back back with with us; us; expressing, expressing, in in the the hardy hardy roving roving manner manner he he assumed, assumed, the the unsettled unsettled habits habits of of a a temporary temporary sojourner sojourner in in the the land; land; and and looking looking at at the the bullocks, bullocks, as as they they came came by, by, with with the the eye eye of of an an australian australian farmer! farmer! chapter chapter 53. 53. another another retrospect retrospect i i must must pause pause yet yet once once again. again. o, o, my my child-wife, child-wife, there there is is a a figure figure in in the the moving moving crowd crowd before before my my memory, memory, quiet quiet and and still, still, saying saying in in its its innocent innocent love love and and childish childish beauty, beauty, stop stop to to think think of of me me -- -- turn turn to to look look upon upon the the little little blossom, blossom, as as it it flutters flutters to to the the ground! ground! i i do. do. all all else else grows grows dim, dim, and and fades fades away. away. i i am am again again with with dora, dora, in in our our cottage. cottage. i i do do not not know know how how long long she she has has been been ill. ill. i i am am so so used used to to it it in in feeling, feeling, that that i i cannot cannot count count the the time. time. it it is is not not really really long, long, in in weeks weeks or or months; months; but, but, in in my my usage usage and and experience, experience, it it is is a a weary, weary, weary weary while. while. they they have have left left off off telling telling me me to to 'wait 'wait a a few few days days more'. more'. i i have have begun begun to to fear, fear, remotely, remotely, that that the the day day may may never never shine, shine, when when i i shall shall see see my my child-wife child-wife running running in in the the sunlight sunlight with with her her old old friend friend jip. jip. he he is, is, as as it it were were suddenly, suddenly, grown grown very very old. old. it it may may be be that that he he misses misses in in his his mistress, mistress, something something that that enlivened enlivened him him and and made made him him younger; younger; but but he he mopes, mopes, and and his his sight sight is is weak, weak, and and his his limbs limbs are are feeble, feeble, and and my my aunt aunt is is sorry sorry that that he he objects objects to to her her no no more, more, but but creeps creeps near near her her as as he he lies lies on on dora's dora's bed bed -- -- she she sitting sitting at at the the bedside bedside -- -- and and mildly mildly licks licks her her hand. hand. dora dora lies lies smiling smiling on on us, us, and and is is beautiful, beautiful, and and utters utters no no hasty hasty or or complaining complaining word. word. she she says says that that we we are are very very good good to to her; her; that that her her dear dear old old careful careful boy boy is is tiring tiring himself himself out, out, she she knows; knows; that that my my aunt aunt has has no no sleep, sleep, yet yet is is always always wakeful, wakeful, active, active, and and kind. kind. sometimes, sometimes, the the little little bird-like bird-like ladies ladies come come to to see see her; her; and and then then we we talk talk about about our our wedding-day, wedding-day, and and all all that that happy happy time. time. what what a a strange strange rest rest and and pause pause in in my my life life there there seems seems to to be be -- -- and and in in all all life, life, within within doors doors and and without without -- -- when when i i sit sit in in the the quiet, quiet, shaded, shaded, orderly orderly room, room, with with the the blue blue eyes eyes of of my my child-wife child-wife turned turned towards towards me, me, and and her her little little fingers fingers twining twining round round my my hand! hand! many many and and many many an an hour hour i i sit sit thus; thus; but, but, of of all all those those times, times, three three times times come come the the freshest freshest on on my my mind. mind. it it is is morning; morning; and and dora, dora, made made so so trim trim by by my my aunt's aunt's hands, hands, shows shows me me how how her her pretty pretty hair hair will will curl curl upon upon the the pillow pillow yet, yet, an an how how long long and and bright bright it it is, is, and and how how she she likes likes to to have have it it loosely loosely gathered gathered in in that that net net she she wears. wears. 'not 'not that that i i am am vain vain of of it, it, now, now, you mocking mocking boy,' boy,' she she says, says, when when i i smile; smile; 'but 'but because because you used used to to say say you thought thought it it so so beautiful; beautiful; and and because, because, when when i i first first began began to to think think about about you, i i used used to to peep peep in in the the glass, glass, and and wonder wonder whether whether you would would like like very very much much to to have have a a lock lock of of it. it. oh oh what what a a foolish foolish fellow fellow you were, were, doady, doady, when when i i gave gave you one!' one!' 'that 'that was was on on the the day day when when you were were painting painting the the flowers flowers i i had had given given you, dora, dora, and and when when i i told told you how how much much in in love love i i was.' was.' 'ah! 'ah! but but i i didn't didn't like like to to tell tell you,' says says dora, dora, 'then, 'then, how how i i had had cried cried over over them, them, because because i i believed believed you really really liked liked me! me! when when i i can can run run about about again again as as i i used used to to do, do, doady, doady, let let us us go go and and see see those those places places where where we we were were such such a a silly silly couple, couple, shall shall we? we? and and take take some some of of the the old old walks? walks? and and not not forget forget poor poor papa?' papa?' 'yes, 'yes, we we will, will, and and have have some some happy happy days. days. so so you must must make make haste haste to to get get well, well, my my dear.' dear.' 'oh, 'oh, i i shall shall soon soon do do that! that! i i am am so so much much better, better, you don't don't know!' know!' it it is is evening; evening; and and i i sit sit in in the the same same chair, chair, by by the the same same bed, bed, with with the the same same face face turned turned towards towards me. me. we we have have been been silent, silent, and and there there is is a a smile smile upon upon her her face. face. i i have have ceased ceased to to carry carry my my light light burden burden up up and and down down stairs stairs now. now. she she lies lies here here all all the the day. day. 'doady!' 'doady!' 'my 'my dear dear dora!' dora!' 'you won't won't think think what what i i am am going going to to say, say, unreasonable, unreasonable, after after what what you told told me, me, such such a a little little while while ago, ago, of of mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's not not being being well? well? i i want want to to see see agnes. agnes. very very much much i i want want to to see see her.' her.' 'i 'i will will write write to to her, her, my my dear.' dear.' 'will 'will you?' 'directly.' 'directly.' 'what 'what a a good, good, kind kind boy! boy! doady, doady, take take me me on on your your arm. arm. indeed, indeed, my my dear, dear, it's it's not not a a whim. whim. it's it's not not a a foolish foolish fancy. fancy. i i want, want, very very much much indeed, indeed, to to see see her!' her!' 'i 'i am am certain certain of of it. it. i i have have only only to to tell tell her her so, so, and and she she is is sure sure to to come.' come.' 'you are are very very lonely lonely when when you go go downstairs, downstairs, now?' now?' dora dora whispers, whispers, with with her her arm arm about about my my neck. neck. 'how 'how can can i i be be otherwise, otherwise, my my own own love, love, when when i i see see your your empty empty chair?' chair?' 'my 'my empty empty chair!' chair!' she she clings clings to to me me for for a a little little while, while, in in silence. silence. 'and 'and you really really miss miss me, me, doady?' doady?' looking looking up, up, and and brightly brightly smiling. smiling. 'even 'even poor, poor, giddy, giddy, stupid stupid me?' me?' 'my 'my heart, heart, who who is is there there upon upon earth earth that that i i could could miss miss so so much?' much?' 'oh, 'oh, husband! husband! i i am am so so glad, glad, yet yet so so sorry!' sorry!' creeping creeping closer closer to to me, me, and and folding folding me me in in both both her her arms. arms. she she laughs laughs and and sobs, sobs, and and then then is is quiet, quiet, and and quite quite happy. happy. 'quite!' 'quite!' she she says. says. 'only 'only give give agnes agnes my my dear dear love, love, and and tell tell her her that that i i want want very, very, very, very, much much to to see see her; her; and and i i have have nothing nothing left left to to wish wish for.' for.' 'except 'except to to get get well well again, again, dora.' dora.' 'ah, 'ah, doady! doady! sometimes sometimes i i think think -- -- you know know i i always always was was a a silly silly little little thing! thing! -- -- that that that that will will never never be!' be!' 'don't 'don't say say so, so, dora! dora! dearest dearest love, love, don't don't think think so!' so!' 'i 'i won't, won't, if if i i can can help help it, it, doady. doady. but but i i am am very very happy; happy; though though my my dear dear boy boy is is so so lonely lonely by by himself, himself, before before his his child-wife's child-wife's empty empty chair!' chair!' it it is is night; night; and and i i am am with with her her still. still. agnes agnes has has arrived; arrived; has has been been among among us us for for a a whole whole day day and and an an evening. evening. she, she, my my aunt, aunt, and and i, i, have have sat sat with with dora dora since since the the morning, morning, all all together. together. we we have have not not talked talked much, much, but but dora dora has has been been perfectly perfectly contented contented and and cheerful. cheerful. we we are are now now alone. alone. do do i i know, know, now, now, that that my my child-wife child-wife will will soon soon leave leave me? me? they they have have told told me me so; so; they they have have told told me me nothing nothing new new to to my my thoughts thoughts -- -- but but i i am am far far from from sure sure that that i i have have taken taken that that truth truth to to heart. heart. i i cannot cannot master master it. it. i i have have withdrawn withdrawn by by myself, myself, many many times times today, today, to to weep. weep. i i have have remembered remembered who who wept wept for for a a parting parting between between the the living living and and the the dead. dead. i i have have bethought bethought me me of of all all that that gracious gracious and and compassionate compassionate history. history. i i have have tried tried to to resign resign myself, myself, and and to to console console myself; myself; and and that, that, i i hope, hope, i i may may have have done done imperfectly; imperfectly; but but what what i i cannot cannot firmly firmly settle settle in in my my mind mind is, is, that that the the end end will will absolutely absolutely come. come. i i hold hold her her hand hand in in mine, mine, i i hold hold her her heart heart in in mine, mine, i i see see her her love love for for me, me, alive alive in in all all its its strength. strength. i i cannot cannot shut shut out out a a pale pale lingering lingering shadow shadow of of belief belief that that she she will will be be spared. spared. 'i 'i am am going going to to speak speak to to you, doady. doady. i i am am going going to to say say something something i i have have often often thought thought of of saying, saying, lately. lately. you won't won't mind?' mind?' with with a a gentle gentle look. look. 'mind, 'mind, my my darling?' darling?' 'because 'because i i don't don't know know what what you will will think, think, or or what what you may may have have thought thought sometimes. sometimes. perhaps perhaps you have have often often thought thought the the same. same. doady, doady, dear, dear, i i am am afraid afraid i i was was too too young.' young.' i i lay lay my my face face upon upon the the pillow pillow by by her, her, and and she she looks looks into into my my eyes, eyes, and and speaks speaks very very softly. softly. gradually, gradually, as as she she goes goes on, on, i i feel, feel, with with a a stricken stricken heart, heart, that that she she is is speaking speaking of of herself herself as as past. past. 'i 'i am am afraid, afraid, dear, dear, i i was was too too young. young. i i don't don't mean mean in in years years only, only, but but in in experience, experience, and and thoughts, thoughts, and and everything. everything. i i was was such such a a silly silly little little creature! creature! i i am am afraid afraid it it would would have have been been better, better, if if we we had had only only loved loved each each other other as as a a boy boy and and girl, girl, and and forgotten forgotten it. it. i i have have begun begun to to think think i i was was not not fit fit to to be be a a wife.' wife.' i i try try to to stay stay my my tears, tears, and and to to reply, reply, 'oh, 'oh, dora, dora, love, love, as as fit fit as as i i to to be be a a husband!' husband!' 'i 'i don't don't know,' know,' with with the the old old shake shake of of her her curls. curls. 'perhaps! 'perhaps! but but if if i i had had been been more more fit fit to to be be married married i i might might have have made made you more more so, so, too. too. besides, besides, you are are very very clever, clever, and and i i never never was.' was.' 'we 'we have have been been very very happy, happy, my my sweet sweet dora.' dora.' 'i 'i was was very very happy, happy, very. very. but, but, as as years years went went on, on, my my dear dear boy boy would would have have wearied wearied of of his his child-wife. child-wife. she she would would have have been been less less and and less less a a companion companion for for him. him. he he would would have have been been more more and and more more sensible sensible of of what what was was wanting wanting in in his his home. home. she she wouldn't wouldn't have have improved. improved. it it is is better better as as it it is.' is.' 'oh, 'oh, dora, dora, dearest, dearest, dearest, dearest, do do not not speak speak to to me me so. so. every every word word seems seems a a reproach!' reproach!' 'no, 'no, not not a a syllable!' syllable!' she she answers, answers, kissing kissing me. me. 'oh, 'oh, my my dear, dear, you never never deserved deserved it, it, and and i i loved loved you far far too too well well to to say say a a reproachful reproachful word word to to you, in in earnest earnest -- -- it it was was all all the the merit merit i i had, had, except except being being pretty pretty -- -- or or you thought thought me me so. so. is is it it lonely, lonely, down-stairs, down-stairs, doady?' doady?' 'very! 'very! very!' very!' 'don't 'don't cry! cry! is is my my chair chair there?' there?' 'in 'in its its old old place.' place.' 'oh, 'oh, how how my my poor poor boy boy cries! cries! hush, hush, hush! hush! now, now, make make me me one one promise. promise. i i want want to to speak speak to to agnes. agnes. when when you go go downstairs, downstairs, tell tell agnes agnes so, so, and and send send her her up up to to me; me; and and while while i i speak speak to to her, her, let let no no one one come come -- -- not not even even aunt. aunt. i i want want to to speak speak to to agnes agnes by by herself. herself. i i want want to to speak speak to to agnes, agnes, quite quite alone.' alone.' i i promise promise that that she she shall, shall, immediately; immediately; but but i i cannot cannot leave leave her, her, for for my my grief. grief. 'i 'i said said that that it it was was better better as as it it is!' is!' she she whispers, whispers, as as she she holds holds me me in in her her arms. arms. 'oh, 'oh, doady, doady, after after more more years, years, you never never could could have have loved loved your your child-wife child-wife better better than than you do; do; and, and, after after more more years, years, she she would would so so have have tried tried and and disappointed disappointed you, that that you might might not not have have been been able able to to love love her her half half so so well! well! i i know know i i was was too too young young and and foolish. foolish. it it is is much much better better as as it it is!' is!' agnes agnes is is downstairs, downstairs, when when i i go go into into the the parlour; parlour; and and i i give give her her the the message. message. she she disappears, disappears, leaving leaving me me alone alone with with jip. jip. his his chinese chinese house house is is by by the the fire; fire; and and he he lies lies within within it, it, on on his his bed bed of of flannel, flannel, querulously querulously trying trying to to sleep. sleep. the the bright bright moon moon is is high high and and clear. clear. as as i i look look out out on on the the night, night, my my tears tears fall fall fast, fast, and and my my undisciplined undisciplined heart heart is is chastened chastened heavily heavily -- -- heavily. heavily. i i sit sit down down by by the the fire, fire, thinking thinking with with a a blind blind remorse remorse of of all all those those secret secret feelings feelings i i have have nourished nourished since since my my marriage. marriage. i i think think of of every every little little trifle trifle between between me me and and dora, dora, and and feel feel the the truth, truth, that that trifles trifles make make the the sum sum of of life. life. ever ever rising rising from from the the sea sea of of my my remembrance, remembrance, is is the the image image of of the the dear dear child child as as i i knew knew her her first, first, graced graced by by my my young young love, love, and and by by her her own, own, with with every every fascination fascination wherein wherein such such love love is is rich. rich. would would it, it, indeed, indeed, have have been been better better if if we we had had loved loved each each other other as as a a boy boy and and a a girl, girl, and and forgotten forgotten it? it? undisciplined undisciplined heart, heart, reply! reply! how how the the time time wears, wears, i i know know not; not; until until i i am am recalled recalled by by my my child-wife's child-wife's old old companion. companion. more more restless restless than than he he was, was, he he crawls crawls out out of of his his house, house, and and looks looks at at me, me, and and wanders wanders to to the the door, door, and and whines whines to to go go upstairs. upstairs. 'not 'not tonight, tonight, jip! jip! not not tonight!' tonight!' he he comes comes very very slowly slowly back back to to me, me, licks licks my my hand, hand, and and lifts lifts his his dim dim eyes eyes to to my my face. face. 'oh, 'oh, jip! jip! it it may may be, be, never never again!' again!' he he lies lies down down at at my my feet, feet, stretches stretches himself himself out out as as if if to to sleep, sleep, and and with with a a plaintive plaintive cry, cry, is is dead. dead. 'oh, 'oh, agnes! agnes! look, look, look, look, here!' here!' -- -- that that face, face, so so full full of of pity, pity, and and of of grief, grief, that that rain rain of of tears, tears, that that awful awful mute mute appeal appeal to to me, me, that that solemn solemn hand hand upraised upraised towards towards heaven! heaven! 'agnes?' 'agnes?' it it is is over. over. darkness darkness comes comes before before my my eyes; eyes; and, and, for for a a time, time, all all things things are are blotted blotted out out of of my my remembrance. remembrance. chapter chapter 54. 54. mr. mr. micawber's micawber's transactions transactions this this is is not not the the time time at at which which i i am am to to enter enter on on the the state state of of my my mind mind beneath beneath its its load load of of sorrow. sorrow. i i came came to to think think that that the the future future was was walled walled up up before before me, me, that that the the energy energy and and action action of of my my life life were were at at an an end, end, that that i i never never could could find find any any refuge refuge but but in in the the grave. grave. i i came came to to think think so, so, i i say, say, but but not not in in the the first first shock shock of of my my grief. grief. it it slowly slowly grew grew to to that. that. if if the the events events i i go go on on to to relate, relate, had had not not thickened thickened around around me, me, in in the the beginning beginning to to confuse, confuse, and and in in the the end end to to augment, augment, my my affliction, affliction, it it is is possible possible (though (though i i think think not not probable), probable), that that i i might might have have fallen fallen at at once once into into this this condition. condition. as as it it was, was, an an interval interval occurred occurred before before i i fully fully knew knew my my own own distress; distress; an an interval, interval, in in which which i i even even supposed supposed that that its its sharpest sharpest pangs pangs were were past; past; and and when when my my mind mind could could soothe soothe itself itself by by resting resting on on all all that that was was most most innocent innocent and and beautiful, beautiful, in in the the tender tender story story that that was was closed closed for for ever. ever. when when it it was was first first proposed proposed that that i i should should go go abroad, abroad, or or how how it it came came to to be be agreed agreed among among us us that that i i was was to to seek seek the the restoration restoration of of my my peace peace in in change change and and travel, travel, i i do do not, not, even even now, now, distinctly distinctly know. know. the the spirit spirit of of agnes agnes so so pervaded pervaded all all we we thought, thought, and and said, said, and and did, did, in in that that time time of of sorrow, sorrow, that that i i assume assume i i may may refer refer the the project project to to her her influence. influence. but but her her influence influence was was so so quiet quiet that that i i know know no no more. more. and and now, now, indeed, indeed, i i began began to to think think that that in in my my old old association association of of her her with with the the stained-glass stained-glass window window in in the the church, church, a a prophetic prophetic foreshadowing foreshadowing of of what what she she would would be be to to me, me, in in the the calamity calamity that that was was to to happen happen in in the the fullness fullness of of time, time, had had found found a a way way into into my my mind. mind. in in all all that that sorrow, sorrow, from from the the moment, moment, never never to to be be forgotten, forgotten, when when she she stood stood before before me me with with her her upraised upraised hand, hand, she she was was like like a a sacred sacred presence presence in in my my lonely lonely house. house. when when the the angel angel of of death death alighted alighted there, there, my my child-wife child-wife fell fell asleep asleep -- -- they they told told me me so so when when i i could could bear bear to to hear hear it it -- -- on on her her bosom, bosom, with with a a smile. smile. from from my my swoon, swoon, i i first first awoke awoke to to a a consciousness consciousness of of her her compassionate compassionate tears, tears, her her words words of of hope hope and and peace, peace, her her gentle gentle face face bending bending down down as as from from a a purer purer region region nearer nearer heaven, heaven, over over my my undisciplined undisciplined heart, heart, and and softening softening its its pain. pain. let let me me go go on. on. i i was was to to go go abroad. abroad. that that seemed seemed to to have have been been determined determined among among us us from from the the first. first. the the ground ground now now covering covering all all that that could could perish perish of of my my departed departed wife, wife, i i waited waited only only for for what what mr. mr. micawber micawber called called the the 'final 'final pulverization pulverization of of heep'; heep'; and and for for the the departure departure of of the the emigrants. emigrants. at at the the request request of of traddles, traddles, most most affectionate affectionate and and devoted devoted of of friends friends in in my my trouble, trouble, we we returned returned to to canterbury: canterbury: i i mean mean my my aunt, aunt, agnes, agnes, and and i. i. we we proceeded proceeded by by appointment appointment straight straight to to mr. mr. micawber's micawber's house; house; where, where, and and at at mr. mr. wickfield's, wickfield's, my my friend friend had had been been labouring labouring ever ever since since our our explosive explosive meeting. meeting. when when poor poor mrs. mrs. micawber micawber saw saw me me come come in, in, in in my my black black clothes, clothes, she she was was sensibly sensibly affected. affected. there there was was a a great great deal deal of of good good in in mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's heart, heart, which which had had not not been been dunned dunned out out of of it it in in all all those those many many years. years. 'well, 'well, mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber,' micawber,' was was my my aunt's aunt's first first salutation salutation after after we we were were seated. seated. 'pray, 'pray, have have you thought thought about about that that emigration emigration proposal proposal of of mine?' mine?' 'my 'my dear dear madam,' madam,' returned returned mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'perhaps 'perhaps i i cannot cannot better better express express the the conclusion conclusion at at which which mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, your your humble humble servant, servant, and and i i may may add add our our children, children, have have jointly jointly and and severally severally arrived, arrived, than than by by borrowing borrowing the the language language of of an an illustrious illustrious poet, poet, to to reply reply that that our our boat boat is is on on the the shore, shore, and and our our bark bark is is on on the the sea.' sea.' 'that's 'that's right,' right,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i augur augur all all sort sort of of good good from from your your sensible sensible decision.' decision.' 'madam, 'madam, you do do us us a a great great deal deal of of honour,' honour,' he he rejoined. rejoined. he he then then referred referred to to a a memorandum. memorandum. 'with 'with respect respect to to the the pecuniary pecuniary assistance assistance enabling enabling us us to to launch launch our our frail frail canoe canoe on on the the ocean ocean of of enterprise, enterprise, i i have have reconsidered reconsidered that that important important business-point; business-point; and and would would beg beg to to propose propose my my notes notes of of hand hand -- -- drawn, drawn, it it is is needless needless to to stipulate, stipulate, on on stamps stamps of of the the amounts amounts respectively respectively required required by by the the various various acts acts of of parliament parliament applying applying to to such such securities securities -- -- at at eighteen, eighteen, twenty-four, twenty-four, and and thirty thirty months. months. the the proposition proposition i i originally originally submitted, submitted, was was twelve, twelve, eighteen, eighteen, and and twenty-four; twenty-four; but but i i am am apprehensive apprehensive that that such such an an arrangement arrangement might might not not allow allow sufficient sufficient time time for for the the requisite requisite amount amount of of -- -- something something -- -- to to turn turn up. up. we we might might not,' not,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, looking looking round round the the room room as as if if it it represented represented several several hundred hundred acres acres of of highly highly cultivated cultivated land, land, 'on 'on the the first first responsibility responsibility becoming becoming due, due, have have been been successful successful in in our our harvest, harvest, or or we we might might not not have have got got our our harvest harvest in. in. labour, labour, i i believe, believe, is is sometimes sometimes difficult difficult to to obtain obtain in in that that portion portion of of our our colonial colonial possessions possessions where where it it will will be be our our lot lot to to combat combat with with the the teeming teeming soil.' soil.' 'arrange 'arrange it it in in any any way way you please, please, sir,' sir,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'madam,' 'madam,' he he replied, replied, 'mrs. 'mrs. micawber micawber and and myself myself are are deeply deeply sensible sensible of of the the very very considerate considerate kindness kindness of of our our friends friends and and patrons. patrons. what what i i wish wish is, is, to to be be perfectly perfectly business-like, business-like, and and perfectly perfectly punctual. punctual. turning turning over, over, as as we we are are about about to to turn turn over, over, an an entirely entirely new new leaf; leaf; and and falling falling back, back, as as we we are are now now in in the the act act of of falling falling back, back, for for a a spring spring of of no no common common magnitude; magnitude; it it is is important important to to my my sense sense of of self-respect, self-respect, besides besides being being an an example example to to my my son, son, that that these these arrangements arrangements should should be be concluded concluded as as between between man man and and man.' man.' i i don't don't know know that that mr. mr. micawber micawber attached attached any any meaning meaning to to this this last last phrase; phrase; i i don't don't know know that that anybody anybody ever ever does, does, or or did; did; but but he he appeared appeared to to relish relish it it uncommonly, uncommonly, and and repeated, repeated, with with an an impressive impressive cough, cough, 'as 'as between between man man and and man'. man'. 'i 'i propose,' propose,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'bills 'bills -- -- a a convenience convenience to to the the mercantile mercantile world, world, for for which, which, i i believe, believe, we we are are originally originally indebted indebted to to the the jews, jews, who who appear appear to to me me to to have have had had a a devilish devilish deal deal too too much much to to do do with with them them ever ever since since -- -- because because they they are are negotiable. negotiable. but but if if a a bond, bond, or or any any other other description description of of security, security, would would be be preferred, preferred, i i should should be be happy happy to to execute execute any any such such instrument. instrument. as as between between man man and and man.' man.' my my aunt aunt observed, observed, that that in in a a case case where where both both parties parties were were willing willing to to agree agree to to anything, anything, she she took took it it for for granted granted there there would would be be no no difficulty difficulty in in settling settling this this point. point. mr. mr. micawber micawber was was of of her her opinion. opinion. 'in 'in reference reference to to our our domestic domestic preparations, preparations, madam,' madam,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with some some pride, pride, 'for 'for meeting meeting the the destiny destiny to to which which we we are are now now understood understood to to be be self-devoted, self-devoted, i i beg beg to to report report them. them. my my eldest eldest daughter daughter attends attends at at five five every every morning morning in in a a neighbouring neighbouring establishment, establishment, to to acquire acquire the the process process -- -- if if process process it it may may be be called called -- -- of of milking milking cows. cows. my my younger younger children children are are instructed instructed to to observe, observe, as as closely closely as as circumstances circumstances will will permit, permit, the the habits habits of of the the pigs pigs and and poultry poultry maintained maintained in in the the poorer poorer parts parts of of this this city: city: a a pursuit pursuit from from which which they they have, have, on on two two occasions, occasions, been been brought brought home, home, within within an an inch inch of of being being run run over. over. i i have have myself myself directed directed some some attention, attention, during during the the past past week, week, to to the the art art of of baking; baking; and and my my son son wilkins wilkins has has issued issued forth forth with with a a walking-stick walking-stick and and driven driven cattle, cattle, when when permitted, permitted, by by the the rugged rugged hirelings hirelings who who had had them them in in charge, charge, to to render render any any voluntary voluntary service service in in that that direction direction -- -- which which i i regret regret to to say, say, for for the the credit credit of of our our nature, nature, was was not not often; often; he he being being generally generally warned, warned, with with imprecations, imprecations, to to desist.' desist.' 'all 'all very very right right indeed,' indeed,' said said my my aunt, aunt, encouragingly. encouragingly. 'mrs. 'mrs. micawber micawber has has been been busy, busy, too, too, i i have have no no doubt.' doubt.' 'my 'my dear dear madam,' madam,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, with with her her business-like business-like air. air. 'i 'i am am free free to to confess confess that that i i have have not not been been actively actively engaged engaged in in pursuits pursuits immediately immediately connected connected with with cultivation cultivation or or with with stock, stock, though though well well aware aware that that both both will will claim claim my my attention attention on on a a foreign foreign shore. shore. such such opportunities opportunities as as i i have have been been enabled enabled to to alienate alienate from from my my domestic domestic duties, duties, i i have have devoted devoted to to corresponding corresponding at at some some length length with with my my family. family. for for i i own own it it seems seems to to me, me, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, who who always always fell fell back back on on me, me, i i suppose suppose from from old old habit, habit, to to whomsoever whomsoever else else she she might might address address her her discourse discourse at at starting, starting, 'that 'that the the time time is is come come when when the the past past should should be be buried buried in in oblivion; oblivion; when when my my family family should should take take mr. mr. micawber micawber by by the the hand, hand, and and mr. mr. micawber micawber should should take take my my family family by by the the hand; hand; when when the the lion lion should should lie lie down down with with the the lamb, lamb, and and my my family family be be on on terms terms with with mr. mr. micawber.' micawber.' i i said said i i thought thought so so too. too. 'this, 'this, at at least, least, is is the the light, light, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' pursued pursued mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'in 'in which which i i view view the the subject. subject. when when i i lived lived at at home home with with my my papa papa and and mama, mama, my my papa papa was was accustomed accustomed to to ask, ask, when when any any point point was was under under discussion discussion in in our our limited limited circle, circle, "in "in what what light light does does my my emma emma view view the the subject?" subject?" that that my my papa papa was was too too partial, partial, i i know; know; still, still, on on such such a a point point as as the the frigid frigid coldness coldness which which has has ever ever subsisted subsisted between between mr. mr. micawber micawber and and my my family, family, i i necessarily necessarily have have formed formed an an opinion, opinion, delusive delusive though though it it may may be.' be.' 'no 'no doubt. doubt. of of course course you have, have, ma'am,' ma'am,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'precisely 'precisely so,' so,' assented assented mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'now, 'now, i i may may be be wrong wrong in in my my conclusions; conclusions; it it is is very very likely likely that that i i am, am, but but my my individual individual impression impression is, is, that that the the gulf gulf between between my my family family and and mr. mr. micawber micawber may may be be traced traced to to an an apprehension, apprehension, on on the the part part of of my my family, family, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber would would require require pecuniary pecuniary accommodation. accommodation. i i cannot cannot help help thinking,' thinking,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, with with an an air air of of deep deep sagacity, sagacity, 'that 'that there there are are members members of of my my family family who who have have been been apprehensive apprehensive that that mr. mr. micawber micawber would would solicit solicit them them for for their their names. names. -- -- -i -i do do not not mean mean to to be be conferred conferred in in baptism baptism upon upon our our children, children, but but to to be be inscribed inscribed on on bills bills of of exchange, exchange, and and negotiated negotiated in in the the money money market.' market.' the the look look of of penetration penetration with with which which mrs. mrs. micawber micawber announced announced this this discovery, discovery, as as if if no no one one had had ever ever thought thought of of it it before, before, seemed seemed rather rather to to astonish astonish my my aunt; aunt; who who abruptly abruptly replied, replied, 'well, 'well, ma'am, ma'am, upon upon the the whole, whole, i i shouldn't shouldn't wonder wonder if if you were were right!' right!' 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber being being now now on on the the eve eve of of casting casting off off the the pecuniary pecuniary shackles shackles that that have have so so long long enthralled enthralled him,' him,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'and 'and of of commencing commencing a a new new career career in in a a country country where where there there is is sufficient sufficient range range for for his his abilities, abilities, -- -- which, which, in in my my opinion, opinion, is is exceedingly exceedingly important; important; mr. mr. micawber's micawber's abilities abilities peculiarly peculiarly requiring requiring space, space, -- -- it it seems seems to to me me that that my my family family should should signalize signalize the the occasion occasion by by coming coming forward. forward. what what i i could could wish wish to to see, see, would would be be a a meeting meeting between between mr. mr. micawber micawber and and my my family family at at a a festive festive entertainment, entertainment, to to be be given given at at my my family's family's expense; expense; where where mr. mr. micawber's micawber's health health and and prosperity prosperity being being proposed, proposed, by by some some leading leading member member of of my my family, family, mr. mr. micawber micawber might might have have an an opportunity opportunity of of developing developing his his views.' views.' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with some some heat, heat, 'it 'it may may be be better better for for me me to to state state distinctly, distinctly, at at once, once, that that if if i i were were to to develop develop my my views views to to that that assembled assembled group, group, they they would would possibly possibly be be found found of of an an offensive offensive nature: nature: my my impression impression being being that that your your family family are, are, in in the the aggregate, aggregate, impertinent impertinent snobs; snobs; and, and, in in detail, detail, unmitigated unmitigated ruffians.' ruffians.' 'micawber,' 'micawber,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, shaking shaking her her head, head, 'no! 'no! you have have never never understood understood them, them, and and they they have have never never understood understood you.' mr. mr. micawber micawber coughed. coughed. 'they 'they have have never never understood understood you, micawber,' micawber,' said said his his wife. wife. 'they 'they may may be be incapable incapable of of it. it. if if so, so, that that is is their their misfortune. misfortune. i i can can pity pity their their misfortune.' misfortune.' 'i 'i am am extremely extremely sorry, sorry, my my dear dear emma,' emma,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, relenting, relenting, 'to 'to have have been been betrayed betrayed into into any any expressions expressions that that might, might, even even remotely, remotely, have have the the appearance appearance of of being being strong strong expressions. expressions. all all i i would would say say is, is, that that i i can can go go abroad abroad without without your your family family coming coming forward forward to to favour favour me, me, -- -- in in short, short, with with a a parting parting shove shove of of their their cold cold shoulders; shoulders; and and that, that, upon upon the the whole, whole, i i would would rather rather leave leave england england with with such such impetus impetus as as i i possess, possess, than than derive derive any any acceleration acceleration of of it it from from that that quarter. quarter. at at the the same same time, time, my my dear, dear, if if they they should should condescend condescend to to reply reply to to your your communications communications -- -- which which our our joint joint experience experience renders renders most most improbable improbable -- -- far far be be it it from from me me to to be be a a barrier barrier to to your your wishes.' wishes.' the the matter matter being being thus thus amicably amicably settled, settled, mr. mr. micawber micawber gave gave mrs. mrs. micawber micawber his his arm, arm, and and glancing glancing at at the the heap heap of of books books and and papers papers lying lying before before traddles traddles on on the the table, table, said said they they would would leave leave us us to to ourselves; ourselves; which which they they ceremoniously ceremoniously did. did. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, leaning leaning back back in in his his chair chair when when they they were were gone, gone, and and looking looking at at me me with with an an affection affection that that made made his his eyes eyes red, red, and and his his hair hair all all kinds kinds of of shapes, shapes, 'i 'i don't don't make make any any excuse excuse for for troubling troubling you with with business, business, because because i i know know you are are deeply deeply interested interested in in it, it, and and it it may may divert divert your your thoughts. thoughts. my my dear dear boy, boy, i i hope hope you are are not not worn worn out?' out?' 'i 'i am am quite quite myself,' myself,' said said i, i, after after a a pause. pause. 'we 'we have have more more cause cause to to think think of of my my aunt aunt than than of of anyone. anyone. you know know how how much much she she has has done.' done.' 'surely, 'surely, surely,' surely,' answered answered traddles. traddles. 'who 'who can can forget forget it!' it!' 'but 'but even even that that is is not not all,' all,' said said i. i. 'during 'during the the last last fortnight, fortnight, some some new new trouble trouble has has vexed vexed her; her; and and she she has has been been in in and and out out of of london london every every day. day. several several times times she she has has gone gone out out early, early, and and been been absent absent until until evening. evening. last last night, night, traddles, traddles, with with this this journey journey before before her, her, it it was was almost almost midnight midnight before before she she came came home. home. you know know what what her her consideration consideration for for others others is. is. she she will will not not tell tell me me what what has has happened happened to to distress distress her.' her.' my my aunt, aunt, very very pale, pale, and and with with deep deep lines lines in in her her face, face, sat sat immovable immovable until until i i had had finished; finished; when when some some stray stray tears tears found found their their way way to to her her cheeks, cheeks, and and she she put put her her hand hand on on mine. mine. 'it's 'it's nothing, nothing, trot; trot; it's it's nothing. nothing. there there will will be be no no more more of of it. it. you shall shall know know by by and and by. by. now now agnes, agnes, my my dear, dear, let let us us attend attend to to these these affairs.' affairs.' 'i 'i must must do do mr. mr. micawber micawber the the justice justice to to say,' say,' traddles traddles began, began, 'that 'that although although he he would would appear appear not not to to have have worked worked to to any any good good account account for for himself, himself, he he is is a a most most untiring untiring man man when when he he works works for for other other people. people. i i never never saw saw such such a a fellow. fellow. if if he he always always goes goes on on in in the the same same way, way, he he must must be, be, virtually, virtually, about about two two hundred hundred years years old, old, at at present. present. the the heat heat into into which which he he has has been been continually continually putting putting himself; himself; and and the the distracted distracted and and impetuous impetuous manner manner in in which which he he has has been been diving, diving, day day and and night, night, among among papers papers and and books; books; to to say say nothing nothing of of the the immense immense number number of of letters letters he he has has written written me me between between this this house house and and mr. mr. wickfield's, wickfield's, and and often often across across the the table table when when he he has has been been sitting sitting opposite, opposite, and and might might much much more more easily easily have have spoken; spoken; is is quite quite extraordinary.' extraordinary.' 'letters!' 'letters!' cried cried my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i believe believe he he dreams dreams in in letters!' letters!' 'there's 'there's mr. mr. dick, dick, too,' too,' said said traddles, traddles, 'has 'has been been doing doing wonders! wonders! as as soon soon as as he he was was released released from from overlooking overlooking uriah uriah heep, heep, whom whom he he kept kept in in such such charge charge as as i i never never saw saw exceeded, exceeded, he he began began to to devote devote himself himself to to mr. mr. wickfield. wickfield. and and really really his his anxiety anxiety to to be be of of use use in in the the investigations investigations we we have have been been making, making, and and his his real real usefulness usefulness in in extracting, extracting, and and copying, copying, and and fetching, fetching, and and carrying, carrying, have have been been quite quite stimulating stimulating to to us.' us.' 'dick 'dick is is a a very very remarkable remarkable man,' man,' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt; aunt; 'and 'and i i always always said said he he was. was. trot, trot, you know know it.' it.' 'i 'i am am happy happy to to say, say, miss miss wickfield,' wickfield,' pursued pursued traddles, traddles, at at once once with with great great delicacy delicacy and and with with great great earnestness, earnestness, 'that 'that in in your your absence absence mr. mr. wickfield wickfield has has considerably considerably improved. improved. relieved relieved of of the the incubus incubus that that had had fastened fastened upon upon him him for for so so long long a a time, time, and and of of the the dreadful dreadful apprehensions apprehensions under under which which he he had had lived, lived, he he is is hardly hardly the the same same person. person. at at times, times, even even his his impaired impaired power power of of concentrating concentrating his his memory memory and and attention attention on on particular particular points points of of business, business, has has recovered recovered itself itself very very much; much; and and he he has has been been able able to to assist assist us us in in making making some some things things clear, clear, that that we we should should have have found found very very difficult difficult indeed, indeed, if if not not hopeless, hopeless, without without him. him. but but what what i i have have to to do do is is to to come come to to results; results; which which are are short short enough; enough; not not to to gossip gossip on on all all the the hopeful hopeful circumstances circumstances i i have have observed, observed, or or i i shall shall never never have have done.' done.' his his natural natural manner manner and and agreeable agreeable simplicity simplicity made made it it transparent transparent that that he he said said this this to to put put us us in in good good heart, heart, and and to to enable enable agnes agnes to to hear hear her her father father mentioned mentioned with with greater greater confidence; confidence; but but it it was was not not the the less less pleasant pleasant for for that. that. 'now, 'now, let let me me see,' see,' said said traddles, traddles, looking looking among among the the papers papers on on the the table. table. 'having 'having counted counted our our funds, funds, and and reduced reduced to to order order a a great great mass mass of of unintentional unintentional confusion confusion in in the the first first place, place, and and of of wilful wilful confusion confusion and and falsification falsification in in the the second, second, we we take take it it to to be be clear clear that that mr. mr. wickfield wickfield might might now now wind wind up up his his business, business, and and his his agency-trust, agency-trust, and and exhibit exhibit no no deficiency deficiency or or defalcation defalcation whatever.' whatever.' 'oh, 'oh, thank thank heaven!' heaven!' cried cried agnes, agnes, fervently. fervently. 'but,' 'but,' said said traddles, traddles, 'the 'the surplus surplus that that would would be be left left as as his his means means of of support support -- -- and and i i suppose suppose the the house house to to be be sold, sold, even even in in saying saying this this -- -- would would be be so so small, small, not not exceeding exceeding in in all all probability probability some some hundreds hundreds of of pounds, pounds, that that perhaps, perhaps, miss miss wickfield, wickfield, it it would would be be best best to to consider consider whether whether he he might might not not retain retain his his agency agency of of the the estate estate to to which which he he has has so so long long been been receiver. receiver. his his friends friends might might advise advise him, him, you know; know; now now he he is is free. free. you yourself, yourself, miss miss wickfield wickfield -- -- copperfield copperfield -- -- i i -- -- ' ' 'i 'i have have considered considered it, it, trotwood,' trotwood,' said said agnes, agnes, looking looking to to me, me, 'and 'and i i feel feel that that it it ought ought not not to to be, be, and and must must not not be; be; even even on on the the recommendation recommendation of of a a friend friend to to whom whom i i am am so so grateful, grateful, and and owe owe so so much.' much.' 'i 'i will will not not say say that that i i recommend recommend it,' it,' observed observed traddles. traddles. 'i 'i think think it it right right to to suggest suggest it. it. no no more.' more.' 'i 'i am am happy happy to to hear hear you say say so,' so,' answered answered agnes, agnes, steadily, steadily, 'for 'for it it gives gives me me hope, hope, almost almost assurance, assurance, that that we we think think alike. alike. dear dear mr. mr. traddles traddles and and dear dear trotwood, trotwood, papa papa once once free free with with honour, honour, what what could could i i wish wish for! for! i i have have always always aspired, aspired, if if i i could could have have released released him him from from the the toils toils in in which which he he was was held, held, to to render render back back some some little little portion portion of of the the love love and and care care i i owe owe him, him, and and to to devote devote my my life life to to him. him. it it has has been, been, for for years, years, the the utmost utmost height height of of my my hopes. hopes. to to take take our our future future on on myself, myself, will will be be the the next next great great happiness happiness -- -- the the next next to to his his release release from from all all trust trust and and responsibility responsibility -- -- that that i i can can know.' know.' 'have 'have you thought thought how, how, agnes?' agnes?' 'often! 'often! i i am am not not afraid, afraid, dear dear trotwood. trotwood. i i am am certain certain of of success. success. so so many many people people know know me me here, here, and and think think kindly kindly of of me, me, that that i i am am certain. certain. don't don't mistrust mistrust me. me. our our wants wants are are not not many. many. if if i i rent rent the the dear dear old old house, house, and and keep keep a a school, school, i i shall shall be be useful useful and and happy.' happy.' the the calm calm fervour fervour of of her her cheerful cheerful voice voice brought brought back back so so vividly, vividly, first first the the dear dear old old house house itself, itself, and and then then my my solitary solitary home, home, that that my my heart heart was was too too full full for for speech. speech. traddles traddles pretended pretended for for a a little little while while to to be be busily busily looking looking among among the the papers. papers. 'next, 'next, miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' said said traddles, traddles, 'that 'that property property of of yours.' yours.' 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' sighed sighed my my aunt. aunt. 'all 'all i i have have got got to to say say about about it it is, is, that that if if it's it's gone, gone, i i can can bear bear it; it; and and if if it's it's not not gone, gone, i i shall shall be be glad glad to to get get it it back.' back.' 'it 'it was was originally, originally, i i think, think, eight eight thousand thousand pounds, pounds, consols?' consols?' said said traddles. traddles. 'right!' 'right!' replied replied my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i can't can't account account for for more more than than five,' five,' said said traddles, traddles, with with an an air air of of perplexity. perplexity. ' ' -- -- thousand, thousand, do do you mean?' mean?' inquired inquired my my aunt, aunt, with with uncommon uncommon composure, composure, 'or 'or pounds?' pounds?' 'five 'five thousand thousand pounds,' pounds,' said said traddles. traddles. 'it 'it was was all all there there was,' was,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i sold sold three, three, myself. myself. one, one, i i paid paid for for your your articles, articles, trot, trot, my my dear; dear; and and the the other other two two i i have have by by me. me. when when i i lost lost the the rest, rest, i i thought thought it it wise wise to to say say nothing nothing about about that that sum, sum, but but to to keep keep it it secretly secretly for for a a rainy rainy day. day. i i wanted wanted to to see see how how you would would come come out out of of the the trial, trial, trot; trot; and and you came came out out nobly nobly -- -- persevering, persevering, self-reliant, self-reliant, self-denying! self-denying! so so did did dick. dick. don't don't speak speak to to me, me, for for i i find find my my nerves nerves a a little little shaken!' shaken!' nobody nobody would would have have thought thought so, so, to to see see her her sitting sitting upright, upright, with with her her arms arms folded; folded; but but she she had had wonderful wonderful self-command. self-command. 'then 'then i i am am delighted delighted to to say,' say,' cried cried traddles, traddles, beaming beaming with with joy, joy, 'that 'that we we have have recovered recovered the the whole whole money!' money!' 'don't 'don't congratulate congratulate me, me, anybody!' anybody!' exclaimed exclaimed my my aunt. aunt. 'how 'how so, so, sir?' sir?' 'you believed believed it it had had been been misappropriated misappropriated by by mr. mr. wickfield?' wickfield?' said said traddles. traddles. 'of 'of course course i i did,' did,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and was was therefore therefore easily easily silenced. silenced. agnes, agnes, not not a a word!' word!' 'and 'and indeed,' indeed,' said said traddles, traddles, 'it 'it was was sold, sold, by by virtue virtue of of the the power power of of management management he he held held from from you; but but i i needn't needn't say say by by whom whom sold, sold, or or on on whose whose actual actual signature. signature. it it was was afterwards afterwards pretended pretended to to mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, by by that that rascal, rascal, -- -- and and proved, proved, too, too, by by figures, figures, -- -- that that he he had had possessed possessed himself himself of of the the money money (on (on general general instructions, instructions, he he said) said) to to keep keep other other deficiencies deficiencies and and difficulties difficulties from from the the light. light. mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, being being so so weak weak and and helpless helpless in in his his hands hands as as to to pay pay you, afterwards, afterwards, several several sums sums of of interest interest on on a a pretended pretended principal principal which which he he knew knew did did not not exist, exist, made made himself, himself, unhappily, unhappily, a a party party to to the the fraud.' fraud.' 'and 'and at at last last took took the the blame blame upon upon himself,' himself,' added added my my aunt; aunt; 'and 'and wrote wrote me me a a mad mad letter, letter, charging charging himself himself with with robbery, robbery, and and wrong wrong unheard unheard of. of. upon upon which which i i paid paid him him a a visit visit early early one one morning, morning, called called for for a a candle, candle, burnt burnt the the letter, letter, and and told told him him if if he he ever ever could could right right me me and and himself, himself, to to do do it; it; and and if if he he couldn't, couldn't, to to keep keep his his own own counsel counsel for for his his daughter's daughter's sake. sake. -- -- -if -if anybody anybody speaks speaks to to me, me, i'll i'll leave leave the the house!' house!' we we all all remained remained quiet; quiet; agnes agnes covering covering her her face. face. 'well, 'well, my my dear dear friend,' friend,' said said my my aunt, aunt, after after a a pause, pause, 'and 'and you have have really really extorted extorted the the money money back back from from him?' him?' 'why, 'why, the the fact fact is,' is,' returned returned traddles, traddles, 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber had had so so completely completely hemmed hemmed him him in, in, and and was was always always ready ready with with so so many many new new points points if if an an old old one one failed, failed, that that he he could could not not escape escape from from us. us. a a most most remarkable remarkable circumstance circumstance is, is, that that i i really really don't don't think think he he grasped grasped this this sum sum even even so so much much for for the the gratification gratification of of his his avarice, avarice, which which was was inordinate, inordinate, as as in in the the hatred hatred he he felt felt for for copperfield. copperfield. he he said said so so to to me, me, plainly. plainly. he he said said he he would would even even have have spent spent as as much, much, to to baulk baulk or or injure injure copperfield.' copperfield.' 'ha!' 'ha!' said said my my aunt, aunt, knitting knitting her her brows brows thoughtfully, thoughtfully, and and glancing glancing at at agnes. agnes. 'and 'and what's what's become become of of him?' him?' 'i 'i don't don't know. know. he he left left here,' here,' said said traddles, traddles, 'with 'with his his mother, mother, who who had had been been clamouring, clamouring, and and beseeching, beseeching, and and disclosing, disclosing, the the whole whole time. time. they they went went away away by by one one of of the the london london night night coaches, coaches, and and i i know know no no more more about about him; him; except except that that his his malevolence malevolence to to me me at at parting parting was was audacious. audacious. he he seemed seemed to to consider consider himself himself hardly hardly less less indebted indebted to to me, me, than than to to mr. mr. micawber; micawber; which which i i consider consider (as (as i i told told him) him) quite quite a a compliment.' compliment.' 'do 'do you suppose suppose he he has has any any money, money, traddles?' traddles?' i i asked. asked. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, yes, yes, i i should should think think so,' so,' he he replied, replied, shaking shaking his his head, head, seriously. seriously. 'i 'i should should say say he he must must have have pocketed pocketed a a good good deal, deal, in in one one way way or or other. other. but, but, i i think think you would would find, find, copperfield, copperfield, if if you had had an an opportunity opportunity of of observing observing his his course, course, that that money money would would never never keep keep that that man man out out of of mischief. mischief. he he is is such such an an incarnate incarnate hypocrite, hypocrite, that that whatever whatever object object he he pursues, pursues, he he must must pursue pursue crookedly. crookedly. it's it's his his only only compensation compensation for for the the outward outward restraints restraints he he puts puts upon upon himself. himself. always always creeping creeping along along the the ground ground to to some some small small end end or or other, other, he he will will always always magnify magnify every every object object in in the the way; way; and and consequently consequently will will hate hate and and suspect suspect everybody everybody that that comes, comes, in in the the most most innocent innocent manner, manner, between between him him and and it. it. so so the the crooked crooked courses courses will will become become crookeder, crookeder, at at any any moment, moment, for for the the least least reason, reason, or or for for none. none. it's it's only only necessary necessary to to consider consider his his history history here,' here,' said said traddles, traddles, 'to 'to know know that.' that.' 'he's 'he's a a monster monster of of meanness!' meanness!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'really 'really i i don't don't know know about about that,' that,' observed observed traddles traddles thoughtfully. thoughtfully. 'many 'many people people can can be be very very mean, mean, when when they they give give their their minds minds to to it.' it.' 'and 'and now, now, touching touching mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'well, 'well, really,' really,' said said traddles, traddles, cheerfully, cheerfully, 'i 'i must, must, once once more, more, give give mr. mr. micawber micawber high high praise. praise. but but for for his his having having been been so so patient patient and and persevering persevering for for so so long long a a time, time, we we never never could could have have hoped hoped to to do do anything anything worth worth speaking speaking of. of. and and i i think think we we ought ought to to consider consider that that mr. mr. micawber micawber did did right, right, for for right's right's sake, sake, when when we we reflect reflect what what terms terms he he might might have have made made with with uriah uriah heep heep himself, himself, for for his his silence.' silence.' 'i 'i think think so so too,' too,' said said i. i. 'now, 'now, what what would would you give give him?' him?' inquired inquired my my aunt. aunt. 'oh! 'oh! before before you come come to to that,' that,' said said traddles, traddles, a a little little disconcerted, disconcerted, 'i 'i am am afraid afraid i i thought thought it it discreet discreet to to omit omit (not (not being being able able to to carry carry everything everything before before me) me) two two points, points, in in making making this this lawless lawless adjustment adjustment -- -- for for it's it's perfectly perfectly lawless lawless from from beginning beginning to to end end -- -- of of a a difficult difficult affair. affair. those those i.o.u.'s, i.o.u.'s, and and so so forth, forth, which which mr. mr. micawber micawber gave gave him him for for the the advances advances he he had had -- -- ' ' 'well! 'well! they they must must be be paid,' paid,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'yes, 'yes, but but i i don't don't know know when when they they may may be be proceeded proceeded on, on, or or where where they they are,' are,' rejoined rejoined traddles, traddles, opening opening his his eyes; eyes; 'and 'and i i anticipate, anticipate, that, that, between between this this time time and and his his departure, departure, mr. mr. micawber micawber will will be be constantly constantly arrested, arrested, or or taken taken in in execution.' execution.' 'then 'then he he must must be be constantly constantly set set free free again, again, and and taken taken out out of of execution,' execution,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'what's 'what's the the amount amount altogether?' altogether?' 'why, 'why, mr. mr. micawber micawber has has entered entered the the transactions transactions -- -- he he calls calls them them transactions transactions -- -- with with great great form, form, in in a a book,' book,' rejoined rejoined traddles, traddles, smiling; smiling; 'and 'and he he makes makes the the amount amount a a hundred hundred and and three three pounds, pounds, five.' five.' 'now, 'now, what what shall shall we we give give him, him, that that sum sum included?' included?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'agnes, 'agnes, my my dear, dear, you and and i i can can talk talk about about division division of of it it afterwards. afterwards. what what should should it it be? be? five five hundred hundred pounds?' pounds?' upon upon this, this, traddles traddles and and i i both both struck struck in in at at once. once. we we both both recommended recommended a a small small sum sum in in money, money, and and the the payment, payment, without without stipulation stipulation to to mr. mr. micawber, micawber, of of the the uriah uriah claims claims as as they they came came in. in. we we proposed proposed that that the the family family should should have have their their passage passage and and their their outfit, outfit, and and a a hundred hundred pounds; pounds; and and that that mr. mr. micawber's micawber's arrangement arrangement for for the the repayment repayment of of the the advances advances should should be be gravely gravely entered entered into, into, as as it it might might be be wholesome wholesome for for him him to to suppose suppose himself himself under under that that responsibility. responsibility. to to this, this, i i added added the the suggestion, suggestion, that that i i should should give give some some explanation explanation of of his his character character and and history history to to mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, who who i i knew knew could could be be relied relied on; on; and and that that to to mr. mr. peggotty peggotty should should be be quietly quietly entrusted entrusted the the discretion discretion of of advancing advancing another another hundred. hundred. i i further further proposed proposed to to interest interest mr. mr. micawber micawber in in mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, by by confiding confiding so so much much of of mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's story story to to him him as as i i might might feel feel justified justified in in relating, relating, or or might might think think expedient; expedient; and and to to endeavour endeavour to to bring bring each each of of them them to to bear bear upon upon the the other, other, for for the the common common advantage. advantage. we we all all entered entered warmly warmly into into these these views; views; and and i i may may mention mention at at once, once, that that the the principals principals themselves themselves did did so, so, shortly shortly afterwards, afterwards, with with perfect perfect good good will will and and harmony. harmony. seeing seeing that that traddles traddles now now glanced glanced anxiously anxiously at at my my aunt aunt again, again, i i reminded reminded him him of of the the second second and and last last point point to to which which he he had had adverted. adverted. 'you and and your your aunt aunt will will excuse excuse me, me, copperfield, copperfield, if if i i touch touch upon upon a a painful painful theme, theme, as as i i greatly greatly fear fear i i shall,' shall,' said said traddles, traddles, hesitating; hesitating; 'but 'but i i think think it it necessary necessary to to bring bring it it to to your your recollection. recollection. on on the the day day of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's memorable memorable denunciation denunciation a a threatening threatening allusion allusion was was made made by by uriah uriah heep heep to to your your aunt's aunt's -- -- husband.' husband.' my my aunt, aunt, retaining retaining her her stiff stiff position, position, and and apparent apparent composure, composure, assented assented with with a a nod. nod. 'perhaps,' 'perhaps,' observed observed traddles, traddles, 'it 'it was was mere mere purposeless purposeless impertinence?' impertinence?' 'no,' 'no,' returned returned my my aunt. aunt. 'there 'there was was -- -- pardon pardon me me -- -- really really such such a a person, person, and and at at all all in in his his power?' power?' hinted hinted traddles. traddles. 'yes, 'yes, my my good good friend,' friend,' said said my my aunt. aunt. traddles, traddles, with with a a perceptible perceptible lengthening lengthening of of his his face, face, explained explained that that he he had had not not been been able able to to approach approach this this subject; subject; that that it it had had shared shared the the fate fate of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's liabilities, liabilities, in in not not being being comprehended comprehended in in the the terms terms he he had had made; made; that that we we were were no no longer longer of of any any authority authority with with uriah uriah heep; heep; and and that that if if he he could could do do us, us, or or any any of of us, us, any any injury injury or or annoyance, annoyance, no no doubt doubt he he would. would. my my aunt aunt remained remained quiet; quiet; until until again again some some stray stray tears tears found found their their way way to to her her cheeks. cheeks. 'you are are quite quite right,' right,' she she said. said. 'it 'it was was very very thoughtful thoughtful to to mention mention it.' it.' 'can 'can i i -- -- or or copperfield copperfield -- -- do do anything?' anything?' asked asked traddles, traddles, gently. gently. 'nothing,' 'nothing,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'i 'i thank thank you many many times. times. trot, trot, my my dear, dear, a a vain vain threat! threat! let let us us have have mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber back. back. and and don't don't any any of of you speak speak to to me!' me!' with with that that she she smoothed smoothed her her dress, dress, and and sat, sat, with with her her upright upright carriage, carriage, looking looking at at the the door. door. 'well, 'well, mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber!' micawber!' said said my my aunt, aunt, when when they they entered. entered. 'we 'we have have been been discussing discussing your your emigration, emigration, with with many many apologies apologies to to you for for keeping keeping you out out of of the the room room so so long; long; and and i'll i'll tell tell you what what arrangements arrangements we we propose.' propose.' these these she she explained explained to to the the unbounded unbounded satisfaction satisfaction of of the the family, family, -- -- children children and and all all being being then then present, present, -- -- and and so so much much to to the the awakening awakening of of mr. mr. micawber's micawber's punctual punctual habits habits in in the the opening opening stage stage of of all all bill bill transactions, transactions, that that he he could could not not be be dissuaded dissuaded from from immediately immediately rushing rushing out, out, in in the the highest highest spirits, spirits, to to buy buy the the stamps stamps for for his his notes notes of of hand. hand. but, but, his his joy joy received received a a sudden sudden check; check; for for within within five five minutes, minutes, he he returned returned in in the the custody custody of of a a sheriff sheriff 's 's officer, officer, informing informing us, us, in in a a flood flood of of tears, tears, that that all all was was lost. lost. we, we, being being quite quite prepared prepared for for this this event, event, which which was was of of course course a a proceeding proceeding of of uriah uriah heep's, heep's, soon soon paid paid the the money; money; and and in in five five minutes minutes more more mr. mr. micawber micawber was was seated seated at at the the table, table, filling filling up up the the stamps stamps with with an an expression expression of of perfect perfect joy, joy, which which only only that that congenial congenial employment, employment, or or the the making making of of punch, punch, could could impart impart in in full full completeness completeness to to his his shining shining face. face. to to see see him him at at work work on on the the stamps, stamps, with with the the relish relish of of an an artist, artist, touching touching them them like like pictures, pictures, looking looking at at them them sideways, sideways, taking taking weighty weighty notes notes of of dates dates and and amounts amounts in in his his pocket-book, pocket-book, and and contemplating contemplating them them when when finished, finished, with with a a high high sense sense of of their their precious precious value, value, was was a a sight sight indeed. indeed. 'now, 'now, the the best best thing thing you can can do, do, sir, sir, if if you'll you'll allow allow me me to to advise advise you,' said said my my aunt, aunt, after after silently silently observing observing him, him, 'is 'is to to abjure abjure that that occupation occupation for for evermore.' evermore.' 'madam,' 'madam,' replied replied mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'it 'it is is my my intention intention to to register register such such a a vow vow on on the the virgin virgin page page of of the the future. future. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber will will attest attest it. it. i i trust,' trust,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, solemnly, solemnly, 'that 'that my my son son wilkins wilkins will will ever ever bear bear in in mind, mind, that that he he had had infinitely infinitely better better put put his his fist fist in in the the fire, fire, than than use use it it to to handle handle the the serpents serpents that that have have poisoned poisoned the the life-blood life-blood of of his his unhappy unhappy parent!' parent!' deeply deeply affected, affected, and and changed changed in in a a moment moment to to the the image image of of despair, despair, mr. mr. micawber micawber regarded regarded the the serpents serpents with with a a look look of of gloomy gloomy abhorrence abhorrence (in (in which which his his late late admiration admiration of of them them was was not not quite quite subdued), subdued), folded folded them them up up and and put put them them in in his his pocket. pocket. this this closed closed the the proceedings proceedings of of the the evening. evening. we we were were weary weary with with sorrow sorrow and and fatigue, fatigue, and and my my aunt aunt and and i i were were to to return return to to london london on on the the morrow. morrow. it it was was arranged arranged that that the the micawbers micawbers should should follow follow us, us, after after effecting effecting a a sale sale of of their their goods goods to to a a broker; broker; that that mr. mr. wickfield's wickfield's affairs affairs should should be be brought brought to to a a settlement, settlement, with with all all convenient convenient speed, speed, under under the the direction direction of of traddles; traddles; and and that that agnes agnes should should also also come come to to london, london, pending pending those those arrangements. arrangements. we we passed passed the the night night at at the the old old house, house, which, which, freed freed from from the the presence presence of of the the heeps, heeps, seemed seemed purged purged of of a a disease; disease; and and i i lay lay in in my my old old room, room, like like a a shipwrecked shipwrecked wanderer wanderer come come home. home. we we went went back back next next day day to to my my aunt's aunt's house house -- -- not not to to mine mine -- -- and and when when she she and and i i sat sat alone, alone, as as of of old, old, before before going going to to bed, bed, she she said: said: 'trot, 'trot, do do you really really wish wish to to know know what what i i have have had had upon upon my my mind mind lately?' lately?' 'indeed 'indeed i i do, do, aunt. aunt. if if there there ever ever was was a a time time when when i i felt felt unwilling unwilling that that you should should have have a a sorrow sorrow or or anxiety anxiety which which i i could could not not share, share, it it is is now.' now.' 'you have have had had sorrow sorrow enough, enough, child,' child,' said said my my aunt, aunt, affectionately, affectionately, 'without 'without the the addition addition of of my my little little miseries. miseries. i i could could have have no no other other motive, motive, trot, trot, in in keeping keeping anything anything from from you.' 'i 'i know know that that well,' well,' said said i. i. 'but 'but tell tell me me now.' now.' 'would 'would you ride ride with with me me a a little little way way tomorrow tomorrow morning?' morning?' asked asked my my aunt. aunt. 'of 'of course.' course.' 'at 'at nine,' nine,' said said she. she. 'i'll 'i'll tell tell you then, then, my my dear.' dear.' at at nine, nine, accordingly, accordingly, we we went went out out in in a a little little chariot, chariot, and and drove drove to to london. london. we we drove drove a a long long way way through through the the streets, streets, until until we we came came to to one one of of the the large large hospitals. hospitals. standing standing hard hard by by the the building building was was a a plain plain hearse. hearse. the the driver driver recognized recognized my my aunt, aunt, and, and, in in obedience obedience to to a a motion motion of of her her hand hand at at the the window, window, drove drove slowly slowly off; off; we we following. following. 'you understand understand it it now, now, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'he 'he is is gone!' gone!' 'did 'did he he die die in in the the hospital?' hospital?' 'yes.' 'yes.' she she sat sat immovable immovable beside beside me; me; but, but, again again i i saw saw the the stray stray tears tears on on her her face. face. 'he 'he was was there there once once before,' before,' said said my my aunt aunt presently. presently. 'he 'he was was ailing ailing a a long long time time -- -- a a shattered, shattered, broken broken man, man, these these many many years. years. when when he he knew knew his his state state in in this this last last illness, illness, he he asked asked them them to to send send for for me. me. he he was was sorry sorry then. then. very very sorry.' sorry.' 'you went, went, i i know, know, aunt.' aunt.' 'i 'i went. went. i i was was with with him him a a good good deal deal afterwards.' afterwards.' 'he 'he died died the the night night before before we we went went to to canterbury?' canterbury?' said said i. i. my my aunt aunt nodded. nodded. 'no 'no one one can can harm harm him him now,' now,' she she said. said. 'it 'it was was a a vain vain threat.' threat.' we we drove drove away, away, out out of of town, town, to to the the churchyard churchyard at at hornsey. hornsey. 'better 'better here here than than in in the the streets,' streets,' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'he 'he was was born born here.' here.' we we alighted; alighted; and and followed followed the the plain plain coffin coffin to to a a corner corner i i remember remember well, well, where where the the service service was was read read consigning consigning it it to to the the dust. dust. 'six-and-thirty 'six-and-thirty years years ago, ago, this this day, day, my my dear,' dear,' said said my my aunt, aunt, as as we we walked walked back back to to the the chariot, chariot, 'i 'i was was married. married. god god forgive forgive us us all!' all!' we we took took our our seats seats in in silence; silence; and and so so she she sat sat beside beside me me for for a a long long time, time, holding holding my my hand. hand. at at length length she she suddenly suddenly burst burst into into tears, tears, and and said: said: 'he 'he was was a a fine-looking fine-looking man man when when i i married married him, him, trot trot -- -- and and he he was was sadly sadly changed!' changed!' it it did did not not last last long. long. after after the the relief relief of of tears, tears, she she soon soon became became composed, composed, and and even even cheerful. cheerful. her her nerves nerves were were a a little little shaken, shaken, she she said, said, or or she she would would not not have have given given way way to to it. it. god god forgive forgive us us all! all! so so we we rode rode back back to to her her little little cottage cottage at at highgate, highgate, where where we we found found the the following following short short note, note, which which had had arrived arrived by by that that morning's morning's post post from from mr. mr. micawber: micawber: 'canterbury, 'canterbury, 'friday. 'friday. 'my 'my dear dear madam, madam, and and copperfield, copperfield, 'the 'the fair fair land land of of promise promise lately lately looming looming on on the the horizon horizon is is again again enveloped enveloped in in impenetrable impenetrable mists, mists, and and for for ever ever withdrawn withdrawn from from the the eyes eyes of of a a drifting drifting wretch wretch whose whose doom doom is is sealed! sealed! 'another 'another writ writ has has been been issued issued (in (in his his majesty's majesty's high high court court of of king's king's bench bench at at westminster), westminster), in in another another cause cause of of heep heep v. v. micawber, micawber, and and the the defendant defendant in in that that cause cause is is the the prey prey of of the the sheriff sheriff having having legal legal jurisdiction jurisdiction in in this this bailiwick. bailiwick. 'now's 'now's the the day, day, and and now's now's the the hour, hour, see see the the front front of of battle battle lower, lower, see see approach approach proud proud edward's edward's power power -- -- chains chains and and slavery! slavery! 'consigned 'consigned to to which, which, and and to to a a speedy speedy end end (for (for mental mental torture torture is is not not supportable supportable beyond beyond a a certain certain point, point, and and that that point point i i feel feel i i have have attained), attained), my my course course is is run. run. bless bless you, bless bless you! some some future future traveller, traveller, visiting, visiting, from from motives motives of of curiosity, curiosity, not not unmingled, unmingled, let let us us hope, hope, with with sympathy, sympathy, the the place place of of confinement confinement allotted allotted to to debtors debtors in in this this city, city, may, may, and and i i trust trust will, will, ponder, ponder, as as he he traces traces on on its its wall, wall, inscribed inscribed with with a a rusty rusty nail, nail, 'the 'the obscure obscure initials, initials, 'w. 'w. m. m. 'p.s. 'p.s. i i re-open re-open this this to to say say that that our our common common friend, friend, mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles (who (who has has not not yet yet left left us, us, and and is is looking looking extremely extremely well), well), has has paid paid the the debt debt and and costs, costs, in in the the noble noble name name of of miss miss trotwood; trotwood; and and that that myself myself and and family family are are at at the the height height of of earthly earthly bliss.' bliss.' chapter chapter 55. 55. tempest tempest i i now now approach approach an an event event in in my my life, life, so so indelible, indelible, so so awful, awful, so so bound bound by by an an infinite infinite variety variety of of ties ties to to all all that that has has preceded preceded it, it, in in these these pages, pages, that, that, from from the the beginning beginning of of my my narrative, narrative, i i have have seen seen it it growing growing larger larger and and larger larger as as i i advanced, advanced, like like a a great great tower tower in in a a plain, plain, and and throwing throwing its its fore-cast fore-cast shadow shadow even even on on the the incidents incidents of of my my childish childish days. days. for for years years after after it it occurred, occurred, i i dreamed dreamed of of it it often. often. i i have have started started up up so so vividly vividly impressed impressed by by it, it, that that its its fury fury has has yet yet seemed seemed raging raging in in my my quiet quiet room, room, in in the the still still night. night. i i dream dream of of it it sometimes, sometimes, though though at at lengthened lengthened and and uncertain uncertain intervals, intervals, to to this this hour. hour. i i have have an an association association between between it it and and a a stormy stormy wind, wind, or or the the lightest lightest mention mention of of a a sea-shore, sea-shore, as as strong strong as as any any of of which which my my mind mind is is conscious. conscious. as as plainly plainly as as i i behold behold what what happened, happened, i i will will try try to to write write it it down. down. i i do do not not recall recall it, it, but but see see it it done; done; for for it it happens happens again again before before me. me. the the time time drawing drawing on on rapidly rapidly for for the the sailing sailing of of the the emigrant-ship, emigrant-ship, my my good good old old nurse nurse (almost (almost broken-hearted broken-hearted for for me, me, when when we we first first met) met) came came up up to to london. london. i i was was constantly constantly with with her, her, and and her her brother, brother, and and the the micawbers micawbers (they (they being being very very much much together); together); but but emily emily i i never never saw. saw. one one evening evening when when the the time time was was close close at at hand, hand, i i was was alone alone with with peggotty peggotty and and her her brother. brother. our our conversation conversation turned turned on on ham. ham. she she described described to to us us how how tenderly tenderly he he had had taken taken leave leave of of her, her, and and how how manfully manfully and and quietly quietly he he had had borne borne himself. himself. most most of of all, all, of of late, late, when when she she believed believed he he was was most most tried. tried. it it was was a a subject subject of of which which the the affectionate affectionate creature creature never never tired; tired; and and our our interest interest in in hearing hearing the the many many examples examples which which she, she, who who was was so so much much with with him, him, had had to to relate, relate, was was equal equal to to hers hers in in relating relating them. them. my my aunt aunt and and i i were were at at that that time time vacating vacating the the two two cottages cottages at at highgate; highgate; i i intending intending to to go go abroad, abroad, and and she she to to return return to to her her house house at at dover. dover. we we had had a a temporary temporary lodging lodging in in covent covent garden. garden. as as i i walked walked home home to to it, it, after after this this evening's evening's conversation, conversation, reflecting reflecting on on what what had had passed passed between between ham ham and and myself myself when when i i was was last last at at yarmouth, yarmouth, i i wavered wavered in in the the original original purpose purpose i i had had formed, formed, of of leaving leaving a a letter letter for for emily emily when when i i should should take take leave leave of of her her uncle uncle on on board board the the ship, ship, and and thought thought it it would would be be better better to to write write to to her her now. now. she she might might desire, desire, i i thought, thought, after after receiving receiving my my communication, communication, to to send send some some parting parting word word by by me me to to her her unhappy unhappy lover. lover. i i ought ought to to give give her her the the opportunity. opportunity. i i therefore therefore sat sat down down in in my my room, room, before before going going to to bed, bed, and and wrote wrote to to her. her. i i told told her her that that i i had had seen seen him, him, and and that that he he had had requested requested me me to to tell tell her her what what i i have have already already written written in in its its place place in in these these sheets. sheets. i i faithfully faithfully repeated repeated it. it. i i had had no no need need to to enlarge enlarge upon upon it, it, if if i i had had had had the the right. right. its its deep deep fidelity fidelity and and goodness goodness were were not not to to be be adorned adorned by by me me or or any any man. man. i i left left it it out, out, to to be be sent sent round round in in the the morning; morning; with with a a line line to to mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, requesting requesting him him to to give give it it to to her; her; and and went went to to bed bed at at daybreak. daybreak. i i was was weaker weaker than than i i knew knew then; then; and, and, not not falling falling asleep asleep until until the the sun sun was was up, up, lay lay late, late, and and unrefreshed, unrefreshed, next next day. day. i i was was roused roused by by the the silent silent presence presence of of my my aunt aunt at at my my bedside. bedside. i i felt felt it it in in my my sleep, sleep, as as i i suppose suppose we we all all do do feel feel such such things. things. 'trot, 'trot, my my dear,' dear,' she she said, said, when when i i opened opened my my eyes, eyes, 'i 'i couldn't couldn't make make up up my my mind mind to to disturb disturb you. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty is is here; here; shall shall he he come come up?' up?' i i replied replied yes, yes, and and he he soon soon appeared. appeared. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' he he said, said, when when we we had had shaken shaken hands, hands, 'i 'i giv giv em'ly em'ly your your letter, letter, sir, sir, and and she she writ writ this this heer; heer; and and begged begged of of me me fur fur to to ask ask you to to read read it, it, and and if if you see see no no hurt hurt in't, in't, to to be be so so kind kind as as take take charge charge on't.' on't.' 'have 'have you read read it?' it?' said said i. i. he he nodded nodded sorrowfully. sorrowfully. i i opened opened it, it, and and read read as as follows: follows: 'i 'i have have got got your your message. message. oh, oh, what what can can i i write, write, to to thank thank you for for your your good good and and blessed blessed kindness kindness to to me! me! 'i 'i have have put put the the words words close close to to my my heart. heart. i i shall shall keep keep them them till till i i die. die. they they are are sharp sharp thorns, thorns, but but they they are are such such comfort. comfort. i i have have prayed prayed over over them, them, oh, oh, i i have have prayed prayed so so much. much. when when i i find find what what you are, are, and and what what uncle uncle is, is, i i think think what what god god must must be, be, and and can can cry cry to to him. him. 'good-bye 'good-bye for for ever. ever. now, now, my my dear, dear, my my friend, friend, good-bye good-bye for for ever ever in in this this world. world. in in another another world, world, if if i i am am forgiven, forgiven, i i may may wake wake a a child child and and come come to to you. all all thanks thanks and and blessings. blessings. farewell, farewell, evermore.' evermore.' this, this, blotted blotted with with tears, tears, was was the the letter. letter. 'may 'may i i tell tell her her as as you doen't doen't see see no no hurt hurt in't, in't, and and as as you'll you'll be be so so kind kind as as take take charge charge on't, on't, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, when when i i had had read read it. it. 'unquestionably,' 'unquestionably,' said said i i -- -- 'but 'but i i am am thinking thinking -- -- ' ' 'yes, 'yes, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' 'i 'i am am thinking,' thinking,' said said i, i, 'that 'that i'll i'll go go down down again again to to yarmouth. yarmouth. there's there's time, time, and and to to spare, spare, for for me me to to go go and and come come back back before before the the ship ship sails. sails. my my mind mind is is constantly constantly running running on on him, him, in in his his solitude; solitude; to to put put this this letter letter of of her her writing writing in in his his hand hand at at this this time, time, and and to to enable enable you to to tell tell her, her, in in the the moment moment of of parting, parting, that that he he has has got got it, it, will will be be a a kindness kindness to to both both of of them. them. i i solemnly solemnly accepted accepted his his commission, commission, dear dear good good fellow, fellow, and and cannot cannot discharge discharge it it too too completely. completely. the the journey journey is is nothing nothing to to me. me. i i am am restless, restless, and and shall shall be be better better in in motion. motion. i'll i'll go go down down tonight.' tonight.' though though he he anxiously anxiously endeavoured endeavoured to to dissuade dissuade me, me, i i saw saw that that he he was was of of my my mind; mind; and and this, this, if if i i had had required required to to be be confirmed confirmed in in my my intention, intention, would would have have had had the the effect. effect. he he went went round round to to the the coach coach office, office, at at my my request, request, and and took took the the box-seat box-seat for for me me on on the the mail. mail. in in the the evening evening i i started, started, by by that that conveyance, conveyance, down down the the road road i i had had traversed traversed under under so so many many vicissitudes. vicissitudes. 'don't 'don't you think think that,' that,' i i asked asked the the coachman, coachman, in in the the first first stage stage out out of of london, london, 'a 'a very very remarkable remarkable sky? sky? i i don't don't remember remember to to have have seen seen one one like like it.' it.' 'nor 'nor i i -- -- not not equal equal to to it,' it,' he he replied. replied. 'that's 'that's wind, wind, sir. sir. there'll there'll be be mischief mischief done done at at sea, sea, i i expect, expect, before before long.' long.' it it was was a a murky murky confusion confusion -- -- here here and and there there blotted blotted with with a a colour colour like like the the colour colour of of the the smoke smoke from from damp damp fuel fuel -- -- of of flying flying clouds, clouds, tossed tossed up up into into most most remarkable remarkable heaps, heaps, suggesting suggesting greater greater heights heights in in the the clouds clouds than than there there were were depths depths below below them them to to the the bottom bottom of of the the deepest deepest hollows hollows in in the the earth, earth, through through which which the the wild wild moon moon seemed seemed to to plunge plunge headlong, headlong, as as if, if, in in a a dread dread disturbance disturbance of of the the laws laws of of nature, nature, she she had had lost lost her her way way and and were were frightened. frightened. there there had had been been a a wind wind all all day; day; and and it it was was rising rising then, then, with with an an extraordinary extraordinary great great sound. sound. in in another another hour hour it it had had much much increased, increased, and and the the sky sky was was more more overcast, overcast, and and blew blew hard. hard. but, but, as as the the night night advanced, advanced, the the clouds clouds closing closing in in and and densely densely over-spreading over-spreading the the whole whole sky, sky, then then very very dark, dark, it it came came on on to to blow, blow, harder harder and and harder. harder. it it still still increased, increased, until until our our horses horses could could scarcely scarcely face face the the wind. wind. many many times, times, in in the the dark dark part part of of the the night night (it (it was was then then late late in in september, september, when when the the nights nights were were not not short), short), the the leaders leaders turned turned about, about, or or came came to to a a dead dead stop; stop; and and we we were were often often in in serious serious apprehension apprehension that that the the coach coach would would be be blown blown over. over. sweeping sweeping gusts gusts of of rain rain came came up up before before this this storm, storm, like like showers showers of of steel; steel; and, and, at at those those times, times, when when there there was was any any shelter shelter of of trees trees or or lee lee walls walls to to be be got, got, we we were were fain fain to to stop, stop, in in a a sheer sheer impossibility impossibility of of continuing continuing the the struggle. struggle. when when the the day day broke, broke, it it blew blew harder harder and and harder. harder. i i had had been been in in yarmouth yarmouth when when the the seamen seamen said said it it blew blew great great guns, guns, but but i i had had never never known known the the like like of of this, this, or or anything anything approaching approaching to to it. it. we we came came to to ipswich ipswich -- -- very very late, late, having having had had to to fight fight every every inch inch of of ground ground since since we we were were ten ten miles miles out out of of london; london; and and found found a a cluster cluster of of people people in in the the market-place, market-place, who who had had risen risen from from their their beds beds in in the the night, night, fearful fearful of of falling falling chimneys. chimneys. some some of of these, these, congregating congregating about about the the inn-yard inn-yard while while we we changed changed horses, horses, told told us us of of great great sheets sheets of of lead lead having having been been ripped ripped off off a a high high church-tower, church-tower, and and flung flung into into a a by-street, by-street, which which they they then then blocked blocked up. up. others others had had to to tell tell of of country country people, people, coming coming in in from from neighbouring neighbouring villages, villages, who who had had seen seen great great trees trees lying lying torn torn out out of of the the earth, earth, and and whole whole ricks ricks scattered scattered about about the the roads roads and and fields. fields. still, still, there there was was no no abatement abatement in in the the storm, storm, but but it it blew blew harder. harder. as as we we struggled struggled on, on, nearer nearer and and nearer nearer to to the the sea, sea, from from which which this this mighty mighty wind wind was was blowing blowing dead dead on on shore, shore, its its force force became became more more and and more more terrific. terrific. long long before before we we saw saw the the sea, sea, its its spray spray was was on on our our lips, lips, and and showered showered salt salt rain rain upon upon us. us. the the water water was was out, out, over over miles miles and and miles miles of of the the flat flat country country adjacent adjacent to to yarmouth; yarmouth; and and every every sheet sheet and and puddle puddle lashed lashed its its banks, banks, and and had had its its stress stress of of little little breakers breakers setting setting heavily heavily towards towards us. us. when when we we came came within within sight sight of of the the sea, sea, the the waves waves on on the the horizon, horizon, caught caught at at intervals intervals above above the the rolling rolling abyss, abyss, were were like like glimpses glimpses of of another another shore shore with with towers towers and and buildings. buildings. when when at at last last we we got got into into the the town, town, the the people people came came out out to to their their doors, doors, all all aslant, aslant, and and with with streaming streaming hair, hair, making making a a wonder wonder of of the the mail mail that that had had come come through through such such a a night. night. i i put put up up at at the the old old inn, inn, and and went went down down to to look look at at the the sea; sea; staggering staggering along along the the street, street, which which was was strewn strewn with with sand sand and and seaweed, seaweed, and and with with flying flying blotches blotches of of sea-foam; sea-foam; afraid afraid of of falling falling slates slates and and tiles; tiles; and and holding holding by by people people i i met, met, at at angry angry corners. corners. coming coming near near the the beach, beach, i i saw, saw, not not only only the the boatmen, boatmen, but but half half the the people people of of the the town, town, lurking lurking behind behind buildings; buildings; some, some, now now and and then then braving braving the the fury fury of of the the storm storm to to look look away away to to sea, sea, and and blown blown sheer sheer out out of of their their course course in in trying trying to to get get zigzag zigzag back. back. joining joining these these groups, groups, i i found found bewailing bewailing women women whose whose husbands husbands were were away away in in herring herring or or oyster oyster boats, boats, which which there there was was too too much much reason reason to to think think might might have have foundered foundered before before they they could could run run in in anywhere anywhere for for safety. safety. grizzled grizzled old old sailors sailors were were among among the the people, people, shaking shaking their their heads, heads, as as they they looked looked from from water water to to sky, sky, and and muttering muttering to to one one another; another; ship-owners, ship-owners, excited excited and and uneasy; uneasy; children, children, huddling huddling together, together, and and peering peering into into older older faces; faces; even even stout stout mariners, mariners, disturbed disturbed and and anxious, anxious, levelling levelling their their glasses glasses at at the the sea sea from from behind behind places places of of shelter, shelter, as as if if they they were were surveying surveying an an enemy. enemy. the the tremendous tremendous sea sea itself, itself, when when i i could could find find sufficient sufficient pause pause to to look look at at it, it, in in the the agitation agitation of of the the blinding blinding wind, wind, the the flying flying stones stones and and sand, sand, and and the the awful awful noise, noise, confounded confounded me. me. as as the the high high watery watery walls walls came came rolling rolling in, in, and, and, at at their their highest, highest, tumbled tumbled into into surf, surf, they they looked looked as as if if the the least least would would engulf engulf the the town. town. as as the the receding receding wave wave swept swept back back with with a a hoarse hoarse roar, roar, it it seemed seemed to to scoop scoop out out deep deep caves caves in in the the beach, beach, as as if if its its purpose purpose were were to to undermine undermine the the earth. earth. when when some some white-headed white-headed billows billows thundered thundered on, on, and and dashed dashed themselves themselves to to pieces pieces before before they they reached reached the the land, land, every every fragment fragment of of the the late late whole whole seemed seemed possessed possessed by by the the full full might might of of its its wrath, wrath, rushing rushing to to be be gathered gathered to to the the composition composition of of another another monster. monster. undulating undulating hills hills were were changed changed to to valleys, valleys, undulating undulating valleys valleys (with (with a a solitary solitary storm-bird storm-bird sometimes sometimes skimming skimming through through them) them) were were lifted lifted up up to to hills; hills; masses masses of of water water shivered shivered and and shook shook the the beach beach with with a a booming booming sound; sound; every every shape shape tumultuously tumultuously rolled rolled on, on, as as soon soon as as made, made, to to change change its its shape shape and and place, place, and and beat beat another another shape shape and and place place away; away; the the ideal ideal shore shore on on the the horizon, horizon, with with its its towers towers and and buildings, buildings, rose rose and and fell; fell; the the clouds clouds fell fell fast fast and and thick; thick; i i seemed seemed to to see see a a rending rending and and upheaving upheaving of of all all nature. nature. not not finding finding ham ham among among the the people people whom whom this this memorable memorable wind wind -- -- for for it it is is still still remembered remembered down down there, there, as as the the greatest greatest ever ever known known to to blow blow upon upon that that coast coast -- -- had had brought brought together, together, i i made made my my way way to to his his house. house. it it was was shut; shut; and and as as no no one one answered answered to to my my knocking, knocking, i i went, went, by by back back ways ways and and by-lanes, by-lanes, to to the the yard yard where where he he worked. worked. i i learned, learned, there, there, that that he he had had gone gone to to lowestoft, lowestoft, to to meet meet some some sudden sudden exigency exigency of of ship-repairing ship-repairing in in which which his his skill skill was was required; required; but but that that he he would would be be back back tomorrow tomorrow morning, morning, in in good good time. time. i i went went back back to to the the inn; inn; and and when when i i had had washed washed and and dressed, dressed, and and tried tried to to sleep, sleep, but but in in vain, vain, it it was was five five o'clock o'clock in in the the afternoon. afternoon. i i had had not not sat sat five five minutes minutes by by the the coffee-room coffee-room fire, fire, when when the the waiter, waiter, coming coming to to stir stir it, it, as as an an excuse excuse for for talking, talking, told told me me that that two two colliers colliers had had gone gone down, down, with with all all hands, hands, a a few few miles miles away; away; and and that that some some other other ships ships had had been been seen seen labouring labouring hard hard in in the the roads, roads, and and trying, trying, in in great great distress, distress, to to keep keep off off shore. shore. mercy mercy on on them, them, and and on on all all poor poor sailors, sailors, said said he, he, if if we we had had another another night night like like the the last! last! i i was was very very much much depressed depressed in in spirits; spirits; very very solitary; solitary; and and felt felt an an uneasiness uneasiness in in ham's ham's not not being being there, there, disproportionate disproportionate to to the the occasion. occasion. i i was was seriously seriously affected, affected, without without knowing knowing how how much, much, by by late late events; events; and and my my long long exposure exposure to to the the fierce fierce wind wind had had confused confused me. me. there there was was that that jumble jumble in in my my thoughts thoughts and and recollections, recollections, that that i i had had lost lost the the clear clear arrangement arrangement of of time time and and distance. distance. thus, thus, if if i i had had gone gone out out into into the the town, town, i i should should not not have have been been surprised, surprised, i i think, think, to to encounter encounter someone someone who who i i knew knew must must be be then then in in london. london. so so to to speak, speak, there there was was in in these these respects respects a a curious curious inattention inattention in in my my mind. mind. yet yet it it was was busy, busy, too, too, with with all all the the remembrances remembrances the the place place naturally naturally awakened; awakened; and and they they were were particularly particularly distinct distinct and and vivid. vivid. in in this this state, state, the the waiter's waiter's dismal dismal intelligence intelligence about about the the ships ships immediately immediately connected connected itself, itself, without without any any effort effort of of my my volition, volition, with with my my uneasiness uneasiness about about ham. ham. i i was was persuaded persuaded that that i i had had an an apprehension apprehension of of his his returning returning from from lowestoft lowestoft by by sea, sea, and and being being lost. lost. this this grew grew so so strong strong with with me, me, that that i i resolved resolved to to go go back back to to the the yard yard before before i i took took my my dinner, dinner, and and ask ask the the boat-builder boat-builder if if he he thought thought his his attempting attempting to to return return by by sea sea at at all all likely? likely? if if he he gave gave me me the the least least reason reason to to think think so, so, i i would would go go over over to to lowestoft lowestoft and and prevent prevent it it by by bringing bringing him him with with me. me. i i hastily hastily ordered ordered my my dinner, dinner, and and went went back back to to the the yard. yard. i i was was none none too too soon; soon; for for the the boat-builder, boat-builder, with with a a lantern lantern in in his his hand, hand, was was locking locking the the yard-gate. yard-gate. he he quite quite laughed laughed when when i i asked asked him him the the question, question, and and said said there there was was no no fear; fear; no no man man in in his his senses, senses, or or out out of of them, them, would would put put off off in in such such a a gale gale of of wind, wind, least least of of all all ham ham peggotty, peggotty, who who had had been been born born to to seafaring. seafaring. so so sensible sensible of of this, this, beforehand, beforehand, that that i i had had really really felt felt ashamed ashamed of of doing doing what what i i was was nevertheless nevertheless impelled impelled to to do, do, i i went went back back to to the the inn. inn. if if such such a a wind wind could could rise, rise, i i think think it it was was rising. rising. the the howl howl and and roar, roar, the the rattling rattling of of the the doors doors and and windows, windows, the the rumbling rumbling in in the the chimneys, chimneys, the the apparent apparent rocking rocking of of the the very very house house that that sheltered sheltered me, me, and and the the prodigious prodigious tumult tumult of of the the sea, sea, were were more more fearful fearful than than in in the the morning. morning. but but there there was was now now a a great great darkness darkness besides; besides; and and that that invested invested the the storm storm with with new new terrors, terrors, real real and and fanciful. fanciful. i i could could not not eat, eat, i i could could not not sit sit still, still, i i could could not not continue continue steadfast steadfast to to anything. anything. something something within within me, me, faintly faintly answering answering to to the the storm storm without, without, tossed tossed up up the the depths depths of of my my memory memory and and made made a a tumult tumult in in them. them. yet, yet, in in all all the the hurry hurry of of my my thoughts, thoughts, wild wild running running with with the the thundering thundering sea, sea, -- -- the the storm, storm, and and my my uneasiness uneasiness regarding regarding ham ham were were always always in in the the fore-ground. fore-ground. my my dinner dinner went went away away almost almost untasted, untasted, and and i i tried tried to to refresh refresh myself myself with with a a glass glass or or two two of of wine. wine. in in vain. vain. i i fell fell into into a a dull dull slumber slumber before before the the fire, fire, without without losing losing my my consciousness, consciousness, either either of of the the uproar uproar out out of of doors, doors, or or of of the the place place in in which which i i was. was. both both became became overshadowed overshadowed by by a a new new and and indefinable indefinable horror; horror; and and when when i i awoke awoke -- -- or or rather rather when when i i shook shook off off the the lethargy lethargy that that bound bound me me in in my my chair chair -- -- my my whole whole frame frame thrilled thrilled with with objectless objectless and and unintelligible unintelligible fear. fear. i i walked walked to to and and fro, fro, tried tried to to read read an an old old gazetteer, gazetteer, listened listened to to the the awful awful noises: noises: looked looked at at faces, faces, scenes, scenes, and and figures figures in in the the fire. fire. at at length, length, the the steady steady ticking ticking of of the the undisturbed undisturbed clock clock on on the the wall wall tormented tormented me me to to that that degree degree that that i i resolved resolved to to go go to to bed. bed. it it was was reassuring, reassuring, on on such such a a night, night, to to be be told told that that some some of of the the inn-servants inn-servants had had agreed agreed together together to to sit sit up up until until morning. morning. i i went went to to bed, bed, exceedingly exceedingly weary weary and and heavy; heavy; but, but, on on my my lying lying down, down, all all such such sensations sensations vanished, vanished, as as if if by by magic, magic, and and i i was was broad broad awake, awake, with with every every sense sense refined. refined. for for hours hours i i lay lay there, there, listening listening to to the the wind wind and and water; water; imagining, imagining, now, now, that that i i heard heard shrieks shrieks out out at at sea; sea; now, now, that that i i distinctly distinctly heard heard the the firing firing of of signal signal guns; guns; and and now, now, the the fall fall of of houses houses in in the the town. town. i i got got up, up, several several times, times, and and looked looked out; out; but but could could see see nothing, nothing, except except the the reflection reflection in in the the window-panes window-panes of of the the faint faint candle candle i i had had left left burning, burning, and and of of my my own own haggard haggard face face looking looking in in at at me me from from the the black black void. void. at at length, length, my my restlessness restlessness attained attained to to such such a a pitch, pitch, that that i i hurried hurried on on my my clothes, clothes, and and went went downstairs. downstairs. in in the the large large kitchen, kitchen, where where i i dimly dimly saw saw bacon bacon and and ropes ropes of of onions onions hanging hanging from from the the beams, beams, the the watchers watchers were were clustered clustered together, together, in in various various attitudes, attitudes, about about a a table, table, purposely purposely moved moved away away from from the the great great chimney, chimney, and and brought brought near near the the door. door. a a pretty pretty girl, girl, who who had had her her ears ears stopped stopped with with her her apron, apron, and and her her eyes eyes upon upon the the door, door, screamed screamed when when i i appeared, appeared, supposing supposing me me to to be be a a spirit; spirit; but but the the others others had had more more presence presence of of mind, mind, and and were were glad glad of of an an addition addition to to their their company. company. one one man, man, referring referring to to the the topic topic they they had had been been discussing, discussing, asked asked me me whether whether i i thought thought the the souls souls of of the the collier-crews collier-crews who who had had gone gone down, down, were were out out in in the the storm? storm? i i remained remained there, there, i i dare dare say, say, two two hours. hours. once, once, i i opened opened the the yard-gate, yard-gate, and and looked looked into into the the empty empty street. street. the the sand, sand, the the sea-weed, sea-weed, and and the the flakes flakes of of foam, foam, were were driving driving by; by; and and i i was was obliged obliged to to call call for for assistance assistance before before i i could could shut shut the the gate gate again, again, and and make make it it fast fast against against the the wind. wind. there there was was a a dark dark gloom gloom in in my my solitary solitary chamber, chamber, when when i i at at length length returned returned to to it; it; but but i i was was tired tired now, now, and, and, getting getting into into bed bed again, again, fell fell -- -- off off a a tower tower and and down down a a precipice precipice -- -- into into the the depths depths of of sleep. sleep. i i have have an an impression impression that that for for a a long long time, time, though though i i dreamed dreamed of of being being elsewhere elsewhere and and in in a a variety variety of of scenes, scenes, it it was was always always blowing blowing in in my my dream. dream. at at length, length, i i lost lost that that feeble feeble hold hold upon upon reality, reality, and and was was engaged engaged with with two two dear dear friends, friends, but but who who they they were were i i don't don't know, know, at at the the siege siege of of some some town town in in a a roar roar of of cannonading. cannonading. the the thunder thunder of of the the cannon cannon was was so so loud loud and and incessant, incessant, that that i i could could not not hear hear something something i i much much desired desired to to hear, hear, until until i i made made a a great great exertion exertion and and awoke. awoke. it it was was broad broad day day -- -- eight eight or or nine nine o'clock; o'clock; the the storm storm raging, raging, in in lieu lieu of of the the batteries; batteries; and and someone someone knocking knocking and and calling calling at at my my door. door. 'what 'what is is the the matter?' matter?' i i cried. cried. 'a 'a wreck! wreck! close close by!' by!' i i sprung sprung out out of of bed, bed, and and asked, asked, what what wreck? wreck? 'a 'a schooner, schooner, from from spain spain or or portugal, portugal, laden laden with with fruit fruit and and wine. wine. make make haste, haste, sir, sir, if if you want want to to see see her! her! it's it's thought, thought, down down on on the the beach, beach, she'll she'll go go to to pieces pieces every every moment.' moment.' the the excited excited voice voice went went clamouring clamouring along along the the staircase; staircase; and and i i wrapped wrapped myself myself in in my my clothes clothes as as quickly quickly as as i i could, could, and and ran ran into into the the street. street. numbers numbers of of people people were were there there before before me, me, all all running running in in one one direction, direction, to to the the beach. beach. i i ran ran the the same same way, way, outstripping outstripping a a good good many, many, and and soon soon came came facing facing the the wild wild sea. sea. the the wind wind might might by by this this time time have have lulled lulled a a little, little, though though not not more more sensibly sensibly than than if if the the cannonading cannonading i i had had dreamed dreamed of, of, had had been been diminished diminished by by the the silencing silencing of of half-a-dozen half-a-dozen guns guns out out of of hundreds. hundreds. but but the the sea, sea, having having upon upon it it the the additional additional agitation agitation of of the the whole whole night, night, was was infinitely infinitely more more terrific terrific than than when when i i had had seen seen it it last. last. every every appearance appearance it it had had then then presented, presented, bore bore the the expression expression of of being being swelled; swelled; and and the the height height to to which which the the breakers breakers rose, rose, and, and, looking looking over over one one another, another, bore bore one one another another down, down, and and rolled rolled in, in, in in interminable interminable hosts, hosts, was was most most appalling. appalling. in in the the difficulty difficulty of of hearing hearing anything anything but but wind wind and and waves, waves, and and in in the the crowd, crowd, and and the the unspeakable unspeakable confusion, confusion, and and my my first first breathless breathless efforts efforts to to stand stand against against the the weather, weather, i i was was so so confused confused that that i i looked looked out out to to sea sea for for the the wreck, wreck, and and saw saw nothing nothing but but the the foaming foaming heads heads of of the the great great waves. waves. a a half-dressed half-dressed boatman, boatman, standing standing next next me, me, pointed pointed with with his his bare bare arm arm (a (a tattoo'd tattoo'd arrow arrow on on it, it, pointing pointing in in the the same same direction) direction) to to the the left. left. then, then, o o great great heaven, heaven, i i saw saw it, it, close close in in upon upon us! us! one one mast mast was was broken broken short short off, off, six six or or eight eight feet feet from from the the deck, deck, and and lay lay over over the the side, side, entangled entangled in in a a maze maze of of sail sail and and rigging; rigging; and and all all that that ruin, ruin, as as the the ship ship rolled rolled and and beat beat -- -- which which she she did did without without a a moment's moment's pause, pause, and and with with a a violence violence quite quite inconceivable inconceivable -- -- beat beat the the side side as as if if it it would would stave stave it it in. in. some some efforts efforts were were even even then then being being made, made, to to cut cut this this portion portion of of the the wreck wreck away; away; for, for, as as the the ship, ship, which which was was broadside broadside on, on, turned turned towards towards us us in in her her rolling, rolling, i i plainly plainly descried descried her her people people at at work work with with axes, axes, especially especially one one active active figure figure with with long long curling curling hair, hair, conspicuous conspicuous among among the the rest. rest. but but a a great great cry, cry, which which was was audible audible even even above above the the wind wind and and water, water, rose rose from from the the shore shore at at this this moment; moment; the the sea, sea, sweeping sweeping over over the the rolling rolling wreck, wreck, made made a a clean clean breach, breach, and and carried carried men, men, spars, spars, casks, casks, planks, planks, bulwarks, bulwarks, heaps heaps of of such such toys, toys, into into the the boiling boiling surge. surge. the the second second mast mast was was yet yet standing, standing, with with the the rags rags of of a a rent rent sail, sail, and and a a wild wild confusion confusion of of broken broken cordage cordage flapping flapping to to and and fro. fro. the the ship ship had had struck struck once, once, the the same same boatman boatman hoarsely hoarsely said said in in my my ear, ear, and and then then lifted lifted in in and and struck struck again. again. i i understood understood him him to to add add that that she she was was parting parting amidships, amidships, and and i i could could readily readily suppose suppose so, so, for for the the rolling rolling and and beating beating were were too too tremendous tremendous for for any any human human work work to to suffer suffer long. long. as as he he spoke, spoke, there there was was another another great great cry cry of of pity pity from from the the beach; beach; four four men men arose arose with with the the wreck wreck out out of of the the deep, deep, clinging clinging to to the the rigging rigging of of the the remaining remaining mast; mast; uppermost, uppermost, the the active active figure figure with with the the curling curling hair. hair. there there was was a a bell bell on on board; board; and and as as the the ship ship rolled rolled and and dashed, dashed, like like a a desperate desperate creature creature driven driven mad, mad, now now showing showing us us the the whole whole sweep sweep of of her her deck, deck, as as she she turned turned on on her her beam-ends beam-ends towards towards the the shore, shore, now now nothing nothing but but her her keel, keel, as as she she sprung sprung wildly wildly over over and and turned turned towards towards the the sea, sea, the the bell bell rang; rang; and and its its sound, sound, the the knell knell of of those those unhappy unhappy men, men, was was borne borne towards towards us us on on the the wind. wind. again again we we lost lost her, her, and and again again she she rose. rose. two two men men were were gone. gone. the the agony agony on on the the shore shore increased. increased. men men groaned, groaned, and and clasped clasped their their hands; hands; women women shrieked, shrieked, and and turned turned away away their their faces. faces. some some ran ran wildly wildly up up and and down down along along the the beach, beach, crying crying for for help help where where no no help help could could be. be. i i found found myself myself one one of of these, these, frantically frantically imploring imploring a a knot knot of of sailors sailors whom whom i i knew, knew, not not to to let let those those two two lost lost creatures creatures perish perish before before our our eyes. eyes. they they were were making making out out to to me, me, in in an an agitated agitated way way -- -- i i don't don't know know how, how, for for the the little little i i could could hear hear i i was was scarcely scarcely composed composed enough enough to to understand understand -- -- that that the the lifeboat lifeboat had had been been bravely bravely manned manned an an hour hour ago, ago, and and could could do do nothing; nothing; and and that that as as no no man man would would be be so so desperate desperate as as to to attempt attempt to to wade wade off off with with a a rope, rope, and and establish establish a a communication communication with with the the shore, shore, there there was was nothing nothing left left to to try; try; when when i i noticed noticed that that some some new new sensation sensation moved moved the the people people on on the the beach, beach, and and saw saw them them part, part, and and ham ham come come breaking breaking through through them them to to the the front. front. i i ran ran to to him him -- -- as as well well as as i i know, know, to to repeat repeat my my appeal appeal for for help. help. but, but, distracted distracted though though i i was, was, by by a a sight sight so so new new to to me me and and terrible, terrible, the the determination determination in in his his face, face, and and his his look look out out to to sea sea -- -- exactly exactly the the same same look look as as i i remembered remembered in in connexion connexion with with the the morning morning after after emily's emily's flight flight -- -- awoke awoke me me to to a a knowledge knowledge of of his his danger. danger. i i held held him him back back with with both both arms; arms; and and implored implored the the men men with with whom whom i i had had been been speaking, speaking, not not to to listen listen to to him, him, not not to to do do murder, murder, not not to to let let him him stir stir from from off off that that sand! sand! another another cry cry arose arose on on shore; shore; and and looking looking to to the the wreck, wreck, we we saw saw the the cruel cruel sail, sail, with with blow blow on on blow, blow, beat beat off off the the lower lower of of the the two two men, men, and and fly fly up up in in triumph triumph round round the the active active figure figure left left alone alone upon upon the the mast. mast. against against such such a a sight, sight, and and against against such such determination determination as as that that of of the the calmly calmly desperate desperate man man who who was was already already accustomed accustomed to to lead lead half half the the people people present, present, i i might might as as hopefully hopefully have have entreated entreated the the wind. wind. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' he he said, said, cheerily cheerily grasping grasping me me by by both both hands, hands, 'if 'if my my time time is is come, come, 'tis 'tis come. come. if if 'tan't, 'tan't, i'll i'll bide bide it. it. lord lord above above bless bless you, and and bless bless all! all! mates, mates, make make me me ready! ready! i'm i'm a-going a-going off!' off!' i i was was swept swept away, away, but but not not unkindly, unkindly, to to some some distance, distance, where where the the people people around around me me made made me me stay; stay; urging, urging, as as i i confusedly confusedly perceived, perceived, that that he he was was bent bent on on going, going, with with help help or or without, without, and and that that i i should should endanger endanger the the precautions precautions for for his his safety safety by by troubling troubling those those with with whom whom they they rested. rested. i i don't don't know know what what i i answered, answered, or or what what they they rejoined; rejoined; but but i i saw saw hurry hurry on on the the beach, beach, and and men men running running with with ropes ropes from from a a capstan capstan that that was was there, there, and and penetrating penetrating into into a a circle circle of of figures figures that that hid hid him him from from me. me. then, then, i i saw saw him him standing standing alone, alone, in in a a seaman's seaman's frock frock and and trousers: trousers: a a rope rope in in his his hand, hand, or or slung slung to to his his wrist: wrist: another another round round his his body: body: and and several several of of the the best best men men holding, holding, at at a a little little distance, distance, to to the the latter, latter, which which he he laid laid out out himself, himself, slack slack upon upon the the shore, shore, at at his his feet. feet. the the wreck, wreck, even even to to my my unpractised unpractised eye, eye, was was breaking breaking up. up. i i saw saw that that she she was was parting parting in in the the middle, middle, and and that that the the life life of of the the solitary solitary man man upon upon the the mast mast hung hung by by a a thread. thread. still, still, he he clung clung to to it. it. he he had had a a singular singular red red cap cap on, on, -- -- not not like like a a sailor's sailor's cap, cap, but but of of a a finer finer colour; colour; and and as as the the few few yielding yielding planks planks between between him him and and destruction destruction rolled rolled and and bulged, bulged, and and his his anticipative anticipative death-knell death-knell rung, rung, he he was was seen seen by by all all of of us us to to wave wave it. it. i i saw saw him him do do it it now, now, and and thought thought i i was was going going distracted, distracted, when when his his action action brought brought an an old old remembrance remembrance to to my my mind mind of of a a once once dear dear friend. friend. ham ham watched watched the the sea, sea, standing standing alone, alone, with with the the silence silence of of suspended suspended breath breath behind behind him, him, and and the the storm storm before, before, until until there there was was a a great great retiring retiring wave, wave, when, when, with with a a backward backward glance glance at at those those who who held held the the rope rope which which was was made made fast fast round round his his body, body, he he dashed dashed in in after after it, it, and and in in a a moment moment was was buffeting buffeting with with the the water; water; rising rising with with the the hills, hills, falling falling with with the the valleys, valleys, lost lost beneath beneath the the foam; foam; then then drawn drawn again again to to land. land. they they hauled hauled in in hastily. hastily. he he was was hurt. hurt. i i saw saw blood blood on on his his face, face, from from where where i i stood; stood; but but he he took took no no thought thought of of that. that. he he seemed seemed hurriedly hurriedly to to give give them them some some directions directions for for leaving leaving him him more more free free -- -- or or so so i i judged judged from from the the motion motion of of his his arm arm -- -- and and was was gone gone as as before. before. and and now now he he made made for for the the wreck, wreck, rising rising with with the the hills, hills, falling falling with with the the valleys, valleys, lost lost beneath beneath the the rugged rugged foam, foam, borne borne in in towards towards the the shore, shore, borne borne on on towards towards the the ship, ship, striving striving hard hard and and valiantly. valiantly. the the distance distance was was nothing, nothing, but but the the power power of of the the sea sea and and wind wind made made the the strife strife deadly. deadly. at at length length he he neared neared the the wreck. wreck. he he was was so so near, near, that that with with one one more more of of his his vigorous vigorous strokes strokes he he would would be be clinging clinging to to it, it, -- -- when when a a high, high, green, green, vast vast hill-side hill-side of of water, water, moving moving on on shoreward, shoreward, from from beyond beyond the the ship, ship, he he seemed seemed to to leap leap up up into into it it with with a a mighty mighty bound, bound, and and the the ship ship was was gone! gone! some some eddying eddying fragments fragments i i saw saw in in the the sea, sea, as as if if a a mere mere cask cask had had been been broken, broken, in in running running to to the the spot spot where where they they were were hauling hauling in. in. consternation consternation was was in in every every face. face. they they drew drew him him to to my my very very feet feet -- -- insensible insensible -- -- dead. dead. he he was was carried carried to to the the nearest nearest house; house; and, and, no no one one preventing preventing me me now, now, i i remained remained near near him, him, busy, busy, while while every every means means of of restoration restoration were were tried; tried; but but he he had had been been beaten beaten to to death death by by the the great great wave, wave, and and his his generous generous heart heart was was stilled stilled for for ever. ever. as as i i sat sat beside beside the the bed, bed, when when hope hope was was abandoned abandoned and and all all was was done, done, a a fisherman, fisherman, who who had had known known me me when when emily emily and and i i were were children, children, and and ever ever since, since, whispered whispered my my name name at at the the door. door. 'sir,' 'sir,' said said he, he, with with tears tears starting starting to to his his weather-beaten weather-beaten face, face, which, which, with with his his trembling trembling lips, lips, was was ashy ashy pale, pale, 'will 'will you come come over over yonder?' yonder?' the the old old remembrance remembrance that that had had been been recalled recalled to to me, me, was was in in his his look. look. i i asked asked him, him, terror-stricken, terror-stricken, leaning leaning on on the the arm arm he he held held out out to to support support me: me: 'has 'has a a body body come come ashore?' ashore?' he he said, said, 'yes.' 'yes.' 'do 'do i i know know it?' it?' i i asked asked then. then. he he answered answered nothing. nothing. but but he he led led me me to to the the shore. shore. and and on on that that part part of of it it where where she she and and i i had had looked looked for for shells, shells, two two children children -- -- on on that that part part of of it it where where some some lighter lighter fragments fragments of of the the old old boat, boat, blown blown down down last last night, night, had had been been scattered scattered by by the the wind wind -- -- among among the the ruins ruins of of the the home home he he had had wronged wronged -- -- i i saw saw him him lying lying with with his his head head upon upon his his arm, arm, as as i i had had often often seen seen him him lie lie at at school. school. chapter chapter 56. 56. the the new new wound, wound, and and the the old old no no need, need, o o steerforth, steerforth, to to have have said, said, when when we we last last spoke spoke together, together, in in that that hour hour which which i i so so little little deemed deemed to to be be our our parting-hour parting-hour -- -- no no need need to to have have said, said, 'think 'think of of me me at at my my best!' best!' i i had had done done that that ever; ever; and and could could i i change change now, now, looking looking on on this this sight! sight! they they brought brought a a hand-bier, hand-bier, and and laid laid him him on on it, it, and and covered covered him him with with a a flag, flag, and and took took him him up up and and bore bore him him on on towards towards the the houses. houses. all all the the men men who who carried carried him him had had known known him, him, and and gone gone sailing sailing with with him, him, and and seen seen him him merry merry and and bold. bold. they they carried carried him him through through the the wild wild roar, roar, a a hush hush in in the the midst midst of of all all the the tumult; tumult; and and took took him him to to the the cottage cottage where where death death was was already. already. but but when when they they set set the the bier bier down down on on the the threshold, threshold, they they looked looked at at one one another, another, and and at at me, me, and and whispered. whispered. i i knew knew why. why. they they felt felt as as if if it it were were not not right right to to lay lay him him down down in in the the same same quiet quiet room. room. we we went went into into the the town, town, and and took took our our burden burden to to the the inn. inn. so so soon soon as as i i could could at at all all collect collect my my thoughts, thoughts, i i sent sent for for joram, joram, and and begged begged him him to to provide provide me me a a conveyance conveyance in in which which it it could could be be got got to to london london in in the the night. night. i i knew knew that that the the care care of of it, it, and and the the hard hard duty duty of of preparing preparing his his mother mother to to receive receive it, it, could could only only rest rest with with me; me; and and i i was was anxious anxious to to discharge discharge that that duty duty as as faithfully faithfully as as i i could. could. i i chose chose the the night night for for the the journey, journey, that that there there might might be be less less curiosity curiosity when when i i left left the the town. town. but, but, although although it it was was nearly nearly midnight midnight when when i i came came out out of of the the yard yard in in a a chaise, chaise, followed followed by by what what i i had had in in charge, charge, there there were were many many people people waiting. waiting. at at intervals, intervals, along along the the town, town, and and even even a a little little way way out out upon upon the the road, road, i i saw saw more: more: but but at at length length only only the the bleak bleak night night and and the the open open country country were were around around me, me, and and the the ashes ashes of of my my youthful youthful friendship. friendship. upon upon a a mellow mellow autumn autumn day, day, about about noon, noon, when when the the ground ground was was perfumed perfumed by by fallen fallen leaves, leaves, and and many many more, more, in in beautiful beautiful tints tints of of yellow, yellow, red, red, and and brown, brown, yet yet hung hung upon upon the the trees, trees, through through which which the the sun sun was was shining, shining, i i arrived arrived at at highgate. highgate. i i walked walked the the last last mile, mile, thinking thinking as as i i went went along along of of what what i i had had to to do; do; and and left left the the carriage carriage that that had had followed followed me me all all through through the the night, night, awaiting awaiting orders orders to to advance. advance. the the house, house, when when i i came came up up to to it, it, looked looked just just the the same. same. not not a a blind blind was was raised; raised; no no sign sign of of life life was was in in the the dull dull paved paved court, court, with with its its covered covered way way leading leading to to the the disused disused door. door. the the wind wind had had quite quite gone gone down, down, and and nothing nothing moved. moved. i i had had not, not, at at first, first, the the courage courage to to ring ring at at the the gate; gate; and and when when i i did did ring, ring, my my errand errand seemed seemed to to me me to to be be expressed expressed in in the the very very sound sound of of the the bell. bell. the the little little parlour-maid parlour-maid came came out, out, with with the the key key in in her her hand; hand; and and looking looking earnestly earnestly at at me me as as she she unlocked unlocked the the gate, gate, said: said: 'i 'i beg beg your your pardon, pardon, sir. sir. are are you ill?' ill?' 'i 'i have have been been much much agitated, agitated, and and am am fatigued.' fatigued.' 'is 'is anything anything the the matter, matter, sir? sir? -- -- -mr. -mr. james? james? -- -- ' ' 'hush!' 'hush!' said said i. i. 'yes, 'yes, something something has has happened, happened, that that i i have have to to break break to to mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. she she is is at at home?' home?' the the girl girl anxiously anxiously replied replied that that her her mistress mistress was was very very seldom seldom out out now, now, even even in in a a carriage; carriage; that that she she kept kept her her room; room; that that she she saw saw no no company, company, but but would would see see me. me. her her mistress mistress was was up, up, she she said, said, and and miss miss dartle dartle was was with with her. her. what what message message should should she she take take upstairs? upstairs? giving giving her her a a strict strict charge charge to to be be careful careful of of her her manner, manner, and and only only to to carry carry in in my my card card and and say say i i waited, waited, i i sat sat down down in in the the drawing-room drawing-room (which (which we we had had now now reached) reached) until until she she should should come come back. back. its its former former pleasant pleasant air air of of occupation occupation was was gone, gone, and and the the shutters shutters were were half half closed. closed. the the harp harp had had not not been been used used for for many many and and many many a a day. day. his his picture, picture, as as a a boy, boy, was was there. there. the the cabinet cabinet in in which which his his mother mother had had kept kept his his letters letters was was there. there. i i wondered wondered if if she she ever ever read read them them now; now; if if she she would would ever ever read read them them more! more! the the house house was was so so still still that that i i heard heard the the girl's girl's light light step step upstairs. upstairs. on on her her return, return, she she brought brought a a message, message, to to the the effect effect that that mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth was was an an invalid invalid and and could could not not come come down; down; but but that that if if i i would would excuse excuse her her being being in in her her chamber, chamber, she she would would be be glad glad to to see see me. me. in in a a few few moments moments i i stood stood before before her. her. she she was was in in his his room; room; not not in in her her own. own. i i felt, felt, of of course, course, that that she she had had taken taken to to occupy occupy it, it, in in remembrance remembrance of of him; him; and and that that the the many many tokens tokens of of his his old old sports sports and and accomplishments, accomplishments, by by which which she she was was surrounded, surrounded, remained remained there, there, just just as as he he had had left left them, them, for for the the same same reason. reason. she she murmured, murmured, however, however, even even in in her her reception reception of of me, me, that that she she was was out out of of her her own own chamber chamber because because its its aspect aspect was was unsuited unsuited to to her her infirmity; infirmity; and and with with her her stately stately look look repelled repelled the the least least suspicion suspicion of of the the truth. truth. at at her her chair, chair, as as usual, usual, was was rosa rosa dartle. dartle. from from the the first first moment moment of of her her dark dark eyes eyes resting resting on on me, me, i i saw saw she she knew knew i i was was the the bearer bearer of of evil evil tidings. tidings. the the scar scar sprung sprung into into view view that that instant. instant. she she withdrew withdrew herself herself a a step step behind behind the the chair, chair, to to keep keep her her own own face face out out of of mrs. mrs. steerforth's steerforth's observation; observation; and and scrutinized scrutinized me me with with a a piercing piercing gaze gaze that that never never faltered, faltered, never never shrunk. shrunk. 'i 'i am am sorry sorry to to observe observe you are are in in mourning, mourning, sir,' sir,' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth. steerforth. 'i 'i am am unhappily unhappily a a widower,' widower,' said said i. i. 'you are are very very young young to to know know so so great great a a loss,' loss,' she she returned. returned. 'i 'i am am grieved grieved to to hear hear it. it. i i am am grieved grieved to to hear hear it. it. i i hope hope time time will will be be good good to to you.' 'i 'i hope hope time,' time,' said said i, i, looking looking at at her, her, 'will 'will be be good good to to all all of of us. us. dear dear mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, we we must must all all trust trust to to that, that, in in our our heaviest heaviest misfortunes.' misfortunes.' the the earnestness earnestness of of my my manner, manner, and and the the tears tears in in my my eyes, eyes, alarmed alarmed her. her. the the whole whole course course of of her her thoughts thoughts appeared appeared to to stop, stop, and and change. change. i i tried tried to to command command my my voice voice in in gently gently saying saying his his name, name, but but it it trembled. trembled. she she repeated repeated it it to to herself, herself, two two or or three three times, times, in in a a low low tone. tone. then, then, addressing addressing me, me, she she said, said, with with enforced enforced calmness: calmness: 'my 'my son son is is ill.' ill.' 'very 'very ill.' ill.' 'you have have seen seen him?' him?' 'i 'i have.' have.' 'are 'are you reconciled?' reconciled?' i i could could not not say say yes, yes, i i could could not not say say no. no. she she slightly slightly turned turned her her head head towards towards the the spot spot where where rosa rosa dartle dartle had had been been standing standing at at her her elbow, elbow, and and in in that that moment moment i i said, said, by by the the motion motion of of my my lips, lips, to to rosa, rosa, 'dead!' 'dead!' that that mrs. mrs. steerforth steerforth might might not not be be induced induced to to look look behind behind her, her, and and read, read, plainly plainly written, written, what what she she was was not not yet yet prepared prepared to to know, know, i i met met her her look look quickly; quickly; but but i i had had seen seen rosa rosa dartle dartle throw throw her her hands hands up up in in the the air air with with vehemence vehemence of of despair despair and and horror, horror, and and then then clasp clasp them them on on her her face. face. the the handsome handsome lady lady -- -- so so like, like, oh oh so so like! like! -- -- regarded regarded me me with with a a fixed fixed look, look, and and put put her her hand hand to to her her forehead. forehead. i i besought besought her her to to be be calm, calm, and and prepare prepare herself herself to to bear bear what what i i had had to to tell; tell; but but i i should should rather rather have have entreated entreated her her to to weep, weep, for for she she sat sat like like a a stone stone figure. figure. 'when 'when i i was was last last here,' here,' i i faltered, faltered, 'miss 'miss dartle dartle told told me me he he was was sailing sailing here here and and there. there. the the night night before before last last was was a a dreadful dreadful one one at at sea. sea. if if he he were were at at sea sea that that night, night, and and near near a a dangerous dangerous coast, coast, as as it it is is said said he he was; was; and and if if the the vessel vessel that that was was seen seen should should really really be be the the ship ship which which -- -- ' ' 'rosa!' 'rosa!' said said mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, 'come 'come to to me!' me!' she she came, came, but but with with no no sympathy sympathy or or gentleness. gentleness. her her eyes eyes gleamed gleamed like like fire fire as as she she confronted confronted his his mother, mother, and and broke broke into into a a frightful frightful laugh. laugh. 'now,' 'now,' she she said, said, 'is 'is your your pride pride appeased, appeased, you madwoman? madwoman? now now has has he he made made atonement atonement to to you -- -- with with his his life! life! do do you hear? hear? -- -- -his -his life!' life!' mrs. mrs. steerforth, steerforth, fallen fallen back back stiffly stiffly in in her her chair, chair, and and making making no no sound sound but but a a moan, moan, cast cast her her eyes eyes upon upon her her with with a a wide wide stare. stare. 'aye!' 'aye!' cried cried rosa, rosa, smiting smiting herself herself passionately passionately on on the the breast, breast, 'look 'look at at me! me! moan, moan, and and groan, groan, and and look look at at me! me! look look here!' here!' striking striking the the scar, scar, 'at 'at your your dead dead child's child's handiwork!' handiwork!' the the moan moan the the mother mother uttered, uttered, from from time time to to time, time, went went to to my my heart. heart. always always the the same. same. always always inarticulate inarticulate and and stifled. stifled. always always accompanied accompanied with with an an incapable incapable motion motion of of the the head, head, but but with with no no change change of of face. face. always always proceeding proceeding from from a a rigid rigid mouth mouth and and closed closed teeth, teeth, as as if if the the jaw jaw were were locked locked and and the the face face frozen frozen up up in in pain. pain. 'do 'do you remember remember when when he he did did this?' this?' she she proceeded. proceeded. 'do 'do you remember remember when, when, in in his his inheritance inheritance of of your your nature, nature, and and in in your your pampering pampering of of his his pride pride and and passion, passion, he he did did this, this, and and disfigured disfigured me me for for life? life? look look at at me, me, marked marked until until i i die die with with his his high high displeasure; displeasure; and and moan moan and and groan groan for for what what you made made him!' him!' 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' i i entreated entreated her. her. 'for 'for heaven's heaven's sake sake -- -- ' ' 'i 'i will will speak!' speak!' she she said, said, turning turning on on me me with with her her lightning lightning eyes. eyes. 'be 'be silent, silent, you! look look at at me, me, i i say, say, proud proud mother mother of of a a proud, proud, false false son! son! moan moan for for your your nurture nurture of of him, him, moan moan for for your your corruption corruption of of him, him, moan moan for for your your loss loss of of him, him, moan moan for for mine!' mine!' she she clenched clenched her her hand, hand, and and trembled trembled through through her her spare, spare, worn worn figure, figure, as as if if her her passion passion were were killing killing her her by by inches. inches. 'you, resent resent his his self-will!' self-will!' she she exclaimed. exclaimed. 'you, injured injured by by his his haughty haughty temper! temper! you, who who opposed opposed to to both, both, when when your your hair hair was was grey, grey, the the qualities qualities which which made made both both when when you gave gave him him birth! birth! you, who who from from his his cradle cradle reared reared him him to to be be what what he he was, was, and and stunted stunted what what he he should should have have been! been! are are you rewarded, rewarded, now, now, for for your your years years of of trouble?' trouble?' 'oh, 'oh, miss miss dartle, dartle, shame! shame! oh oh cruel!' cruel!' 'i 'i tell tell you,' she she returned, returned, 'i 'i will will speak speak to to her. her. no no power power on on earth earth should should stop stop me, me, while while i i was was standing standing here! here! have have i i been been silent silent all all these these years, years, and and shall shall i i not not speak speak now? now? i i loved loved him him better better than than you ever ever loved loved him!' him!' turning turning on on her her fiercely. fiercely. 'i 'i could could have have loved loved him, him, and and asked asked no no return. return. if if i i had had been been his his wife, wife, i i could could have have been been the the slave slave of of his his caprices caprices for for a a word word of of love love a a year. year. i i should should have have been. been. who who knows knows it it better better than than i? i? you were were exacting, exacting, proud, proud, punctilious, punctilious, selfish. selfish. my my love love would would have have been been devoted devoted -- -- would would have have trod trod your your paltry paltry whimpering whimpering under under foot!' foot!' with with flashing flashing eyes, eyes, she she stamped stamped upon upon the the ground ground as as if if she she actually actually did did it. it. 'look 'look here!' here!' she she said, said, striking striking the the scar scar again, again, with with a a relentless relentless hand. hand. 'when 'when he he grew grew into into the the better better understanding understanding of of what what he he had had done, done, he he saw saw it, it, and and repented repented of of it! it! i i could could sing sing to to him, him, and and talk talk to to him, him, and and show show the the ardour ardour that that i i felt felt in in all all he he did, did, and and attain attain with with labour labour to to such such knowledge knowledge as as most most interested interested him; him; and and i i attracted attracted him. him. when when he he was was freshest freshest and and truest, truest, he he loved loved me. me. yes, yes, he he did! did! many many a a time, time, when when you were were put put off off with with a a slight slight word, word, he he has has taken taken me me to to his his heart!' heart!' she she said said it it with with a a taunting taunting pride pride in in the the midst midst of of her her frenzy frenzy -- -- for for it it was was little little less less -- -- yet yet with with an an eager eager remembrance remembrance of of it, it, in in which which the the smouldering smouldering embers embers of of a a gentler gentler feeling feeling kindled kindled for for the the moment. moment. 'i 'i descended descended -- -- as as i i might might have have known known i i should, should, but but that that he he fascinated fascinated me me with with his his boyish boyish courtship courtship -- -- into into a a doll, doll, a a trifle trifle for for the the occupation occupation of of an an idle idle hour, hour, to to be be dropped, dropped, and and taken taken up, up, and and trifled trifled with, with, as as the the inconstant inconstant humour humour took took him. him. when when he he grew grew weary, weary, i i grew grew weary. weary. as as his his fancy fancy died died out, out, i i would would no no more more have have tried tried to to strengthen strengthen any any power power i i had, had, than than i i would would have have married married him him on on his his being being forced forced to to take take me me for for his his wife. wife. we we fell fell away away from from one one another another without without a a word. word. perhaps perhaps you saw saw it, it, and and were were not not sorry. sorry. since since then, then, i i have have been been a a mere mere disfigured disfigured piece piece of of furniture furniture between between you both; both; having having no no eyes, eyes, no no ears, ears, no no feelings, feelings, no no remembrances. remembrances. moan? moan? moan moan for for what what you made made him; him; not not for for your your love. love. i i tell tell you that that the the time time was, was, when when i i loved loved him him better better than than you ever ever did!' did!' she she stood stood with with her her bright bright angry angry eyes eyes confronting confronting the the wide wide stare, stare, and and the the set set face; face; and and softened softened no no more, more, when when the the moaning moaning was was repeated, repeated, than than if if the the face face had had been been a a picture. picture. 'miss 'miss dartle,' dartle,' said said i, i, 'if 'if you can can be be so so obdurate obdurate as as not not to to feel feel for for this this afflicted afflicted mother mother -- -- ' ' 'who 'who feels feels for for me?' me?' she she sharply sharply retorted. retorted. 'she 'she has has sown sown this. this. let let her her moan moan for for the the harvest harvest that that she she reaps reaps today!' today!' 'and 'and if if his his faults faults -- -- ' ' i i began. began. 'faults!' 'faults!' she she cried, cried, bursting bursting into into passionate passionate tears. tears. 'who 'who dares dares malign malign him? him? he he had had a a soul soul worth worth millions millions of of the the friends friends to to whom whom he he stooped!' stooped!' 'no 'no one one can can have have loved loved him him better, better, no no one one can can hold hold him him in in dearer dearer remembrance remembrance than than i,' i,' i i replied. replied. 'i 'i meant meant to to say, say, if if you have have no no compassion compassion for for his his mother; mother; or or if if his his faults faults -- -- you have have been been bitter bitter on on them them -- -- ' ' 'it's 'it's false,' false,' she she cried, cried, tearing tearing her her black black hair; hair; 'i 'i loved loved him!' him!' ' ' -- -- if if his his faults faults cannot,' cannot,' i i went went on, on, 'be 'be banished banished from from your your remembrance, remembrance, in in such such an an hour; hour; look look at at that that figure, figure, even even as as one one you have have never never seen seen before, before, and and render render it it some some help!' help!' all all this this time, time, the the figure figure was was unchanged, unchanged, and and looked looked unchangeable. unchangeable. motionless, motionless, rigid, rigid, staring; staring; moaning moaning in in the the same same dumb dumb way way from from time time to to time, time, with with the the same same helpless helpless motion motion of of the the head; head; but but giving giving no no other other sign sign of of life. life. miss miss dartle dartle suddenly suddenly kneeled kneeled down down before before it, it, and and began began to to loosen loosen the the dress. dress. 'a 'a curse curse upon upon you!' she she said, said, looking looking round round at at me, me, with with a a mingled mingled expression expression of of rage rage and and grief. grief. 'it 'it was was in in an an evil evil hour hour that that you ever ever came came here! here! a a curse curse upon upon you! go!' go!' after after passing passing out out of of the the room, room, i i hurried hurried back back to to ring ring the the bell, bell, the the sooner sooner to to alarm alarm the the servants. servants. she she had had then then taken taken the the impassive impassive figure figure in in her her arms, arms, and, and, still still upon upon her her knees, knees, was was weeping weeping over over it, it, kissing kissing it, it, calling calling to to it, it, rocking rocking it it to to and and fro fro upon upon her her bosom bosom like like a a child, child, and and trying trying every every tender tender means means to to rouse rouse the the dormant dormant senses. senses. no no longer longer afraid afraid of of leaving leaving her, her, i i noiselessly noiselessly turned turned back back again; again; and and alarmed alarmed the the house house as as i i went went out. out. later later in in the the day, day, i i returned, returned, and and we we laid laid him him in in his his mother's mother's room. room. she she was was just just the the same, same, they they told told me; me; miss miss dartle dartle never never left left her; her; doctors doctors were were in in attendance, attendance, many many things things had had been been tried; tried; but but she she lay lay like like a a statue, statue, except except for for the the low low sound sound now now and and then. then. i i went went through through the the dreary dreary house, house, and and darkened darkened the the windows. windows. the the windows windows of of the the chamber chamber where where he he lay, lay, i i darkened darkened last. last. i i lifted lifted up up the the leaden leaden hand, hand, and and held held it it to to my my heart; heart; and and all all the the world world seemed seemed death death and and silence, silence, broken broken only only by by his his mother's mother's moaning. moaning. chapter chapter 57. 57. the the emigrants emigrants one one thing thing more, more, i i had had to to do, do, before before yielding yielding myself myself to to the the shock shock of of these these emotions. emotions. it it was, was, to to conceal conceal what what had had occurred, occurred, from from those those who who were were going going away; away; and and to to dismiss dismiss them them on on their their voyage voyage in in happy happy ignorance. ignorance. in in this, this, no no time time was was to to be be lost. lost. i i took took mr. mr. micawber micawber aside aside that that same same night, night, and and confided confided to to him him the the task task of of standing standing between between mr. mr. peggotty peggotty and and intelligence intelligence of of the the late late catastrophe. catastrophe. he he zealously zealously undertook undertook to to do do so, so, and and to to intercept intercept any any newspaper newspaper through through which which it it might, might, without without such such precautions, precautions, reach reach him. him. 'if 'if it it penetrates penetrates to to him, him, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, striking striking himself himself on on the the breast, breast, 'it 'it shall shall first first pass pass through through this this body!' body!' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, i i must must observe, observe, in in his his adaptation adaptation of of himself himself to to a a new new state state of of society, society, had had acquired acquired a a bold bold buccaneering buccaneering air, air, not not absolutely absolutely lawless, lawless, but but defensive defensive and and prompt. prompt. one one might might have have supposed supposed him him a a child child of of the the wilderness, wilderness, long long accustomed accustomed to to live live out out of of the the confines confines of of civilization, civilization, and and about about to to return return to to his his native native wilds. wilds. he he had had provided provided himself, himself, among among other other things, things, with with a a complete complete suit suit of of oilskin, oilskin, and and a a straw straw hat hat with with a a very very low low crown, crown, pitched pitched or or caulked caulked on on the the outside. outside. in in this this rough rough clothing, clothing, with with a a common common mariner's mariner's telescope telescope under under his his arm, arm, and and a a shrewd shrewd trick trick of of casting casting up up his his eye eye at at the the sky sky as as looking looking out out for for dirty dirty weather, weather, he he was was far far more more nautical, nautical, after after his his manner, manner, than than mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. his his whole whole family, family, if if i i may may so so express express it, it, were were cleared cleared for for action. action. i i found found mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in the the closest closest and and most most uncompromising uncompromising of of bonnets, bonnets, made made fast fast under under the the chin; chin; and and in in a a shawl shawl which which tied tied her her up up (as (as i i had had been been tied tied up, up, when when my my aunt aunt first first received received me) me) like like a a bundle, bundle, and and was was secured secured behind behind at at the the waist, waist, in in a a strong strong knot. knot. miss miss micawber micawber i i found found made made snug snug for for stormy stormy weather, weather, in in the the same same manner; manner; with with nothing nothing superfluous superfluous about about her. her. master master micawber micawber was was hardly hardly visible visible in in a a guernsey guernsey shirt, shirt, and and the the shaggiest shaggiest suit suit of of slops slops i i ever ever saw; saw; and and the the children children were were done done up, up, like like preserved preserved meats, meats, in in impervious impervious cases. cases. both both mr. mr. micawber micawber and and his his eldest eldest son son wore wore their their sleeves sleeves loosely loosely turned turned back back at at the the wrists, wrists, as as being being ready ready to to lend lend a a hand hand in in any any direction, direction, and and to to 'tumble 'tumble up', up', or or sing sing out, out, 'yeo 'yeo -- -- heave heave -- -- yeo!' yeo!' on on the the shortest shortest notice. notice. thus thus traddles traddles and and i i found found them them at at nightfall, nightfall, assembled assembled on on the the wooden wooden steps, steps, at at that that time time known known as as hungerford hungerford stairs, stairs, watching watching the the departure departure of of a a boat boat with with some some of of their their property property on on board. board. i i had had told told traddles traddles of of the the terrible terrible event, event, and and it it had had greatly greatly shocked shocked him; him; but but there there could could be be no no doubt doubt of of the the kindness kindness of of keeping keeping it it a a secret, secret, and and he he had had come come to to help help me me in in this this last last service. service. it it was was here here that that i i took took mr. mr. micawber micawber aside, aside, and and received received his his promise. promise. the the micawber micawber family family were were lodged lodged in in a a little, little, dirty, dirty, tumble-down tumble-down public-house, public-house, which which in in those those days days was was close close to to the the stairs, stairs, and and whose whose protruding protruding wooden wooden rooms rooms overhung overhung the the river. river. the the family, family, as as emigrants, emigrants, being being objects objects of of some some interest interest in in and and about about hungerford, hungerford, attracted attracted so so many many beholders, beholders, that that we we were were glad glad to to take take refuge refuge in in their their room. room. it it was was one one of of the the wooden wooden chambers chambers upstairs, upstairs, with with the the tide tide flowing flowing underneath. underneath. my my aunt aunt and and agnes agnes were were there, there, busily busily making making some some little little extra extra comforts, comforts, in in the the way way of of dress, dress, for for the the children. children. peggotty peggotty was was quietly quietly assisting, assisting, with with the the old old insensible insensible work-box, work-box, yard-measure, yard-measure, and and bit bit of of wax-candle wax-candle before before her, her, that that had had now now outlived outlived so so much. much. it it was was not not easy easy to to answer answer her her inquiries; inquiries; still still less less to to whisper whisper mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, when when mr. mr. micawber micawber brought brought him him in, in, that that i i had had given given the the letter, letter, and and all all was was well. well. but but i i did did both, both, and and made made them them happy. happy. if if i i showed showed any any trace trace of of what what i i felt, felt, my my own own sorrows sorrows were were sufficient sufficient to to account account for for it. it. 'and 'and when when does does the the ship ship sail, sail, mr. mr. micawber?' micawber?' asked asked my my aunt. aunt. mr. mr. micawber micawber considered considered it it necessary necessary to to prepare prepare either either my my aunt aunt or or his his wife, wife, by by degrees, degrees, and and said, said, sooner sooner than than he he had had expected expected yesterday. yesterday. 'the 'the boat boat brought brought you word, word, i i suppose?' suppose?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'it 'it did, did, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he returned. returned. 'well?' 'well?' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'and 'and she she sails sails -- -- ' ' 'madam,' 'madam,' he he replied, replied, 'i 'i am am informed informed that that we we must must positively positively be be on on board board before before seven seven tomorrow tomorrow morning.' morning.' 'heyday!' 'heyday!' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'that's 'that's soon. soon. is is it it a a sea-going sea-going fact, fact, mr. mr. peggotty?' peggotty?' ''tis ''tis so, so, ma'am. ma'am. she'll she'll drop drop down down the the river river with with that that theer theer tide. tide. if if mas'r mas'r davy davy and and my my sister sister comes comes aboard aboard at at gravesen', gravesen', arternoon arternoon o' o' next next day, day, they'll they'll see see the the last last on on us.' us.' 'and 'and that that we we shall shall do,' do,' said said i, i, 'be 'be sure!' sure!' 'until 'until then, then, and and until until we we are are at at sea,' sea,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with a a glance glance of of intelligence intelligence at at me, me, 'mr. 'mr. peggotty peggotty and and myself myself will will constantly constantly keep keep a a double double look-out look-out together, together, on on our our goods goods and and chattels. chattels. emma, emma, my my love,' love,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, clearing clearing his his throat throat in in his his magnificent magnificent way, way, 'my 'my friend friend mr. mr. thomas thomas traddles traddles is is so so obliging obliging as as to to solicit, solicit, in in my my ear, ear, that that he he should should have have the the privilege privilege of of ordering ordering the the ingredients ingredients necessary necessary to to the the composition composition of of a a moderate moderate portion portion of of that that beverage beverage which which is is peculiarly peculiarly associated, associated, in in our our minds, minds, with with the the roast roast beef beef of of old old england. england. i i allude allude to to -- -- in in short, short, punch. punch. under under ordinary ordinary circumstances, circumstances, i i should should scruple scruple to to entreat entreat the the indulgence indulgence of of miss miss trotwood trotwood and and miss miss wickfield, wickfield, but-' but-' 'i 'i can can only only say say for for myself,' myself,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'that 'that i i will will drink drink all all happiness happiness and and success success to to you, mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with the the utmost utmost pleasure.' pleasure.' 'and 'and i i too!' too!' said said agnes, agnes, with with a a smile. smile. mr. mr. micawber micawber immediately immediately descended descended to to the the bar, bar, where where he he appeared appeared to to be be quite quite at at home; home; and and in in due due time time returned returned with with a a steaming steaming jug. jug. i i could could not not but but observe observe that that he he had had been been peeling peeling the the lemons lemons with with his his own own clasp-knife, clasp-knife, which, which, as as became became the the knife knife of of a a practical practical settler, settler, was was about about a a foot foot long; long; and and which which he he wiped, wiped, not not wholly wholly without without ostentation, ostentation, on on the the sleeve sleeve of of his his coat. coat. mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and the the two two elder elder members members of of the the family family i i now now found found to to be be provided provided with with similar similar formidable formidable instruments, instruments, while while every every child child had had its its own own wooden wooden spoon spoon attached attached to to its its body body by by a a strong strong line. line. in in a a similar similar anticipation anticipation of of life life afloat, afloat, and and in in the the bush, bush, mr. mr. micawber, micawber, instead instead of of helping helping mrs. mrs. micawber micawber and and his his eldest eldest son son and and daughter daughter to to punch, punch, in in wine-glasses, wine-glasses, which which he he might might easily easily have have done, done, for for there there was was a a shelf-full shelf-full in in the the room, room, served served it it out out to to them them in in a a series series of of villainous villainous little little tin tin pots; pots; and and i i never never saw saw him him enjoy enjoy anything anything so so much much as as drinking drinking out out of of his his own own particular particular pint pint pot, pot, and and putting putting it it in in his his pocket pocket at at the the close close of of the the evening. evening. 'the 'the luxuries luxuries of of the the old old country,' country,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with an an intense intense satisfaction satisfaction in in their their renouncement, renouncement, 'we 'we abandon. abandon. the the denizens denizens of of the the forest forest cannot, cannot, of of course, course, expect expect to to participate participate in in the the refinements refinements of of the the land land of of the the free.' free.' here, here, a a boy boy came came in in to to say say that that mr. mr. micawber micawber was was wanted wanted downstairs. downstairs. 'i 'i have have a a presentiment,' presentiment,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, setting setting down down her her tin tin pot, pot, 'that 'that it it is is a a member member of of my my family!' family!' 'if 'if so, so, my my dear,' dear,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with his his usual usual suddenness suddenness of of warmth warmth on on that that subject, subject, 'as 'as the the member member of of your your family family -- -- whoever whoever he, he, she, she, or or it, it, may may be be -- -- has has kept kept us us waiting waiting for for a a considerable considerable period, period, perhaps perhaps the the member member may may now now wait wait my my convenience.' convenience.' 'micawber,' 'micawber,' said said his his wife, wife, in in a a low low tone, tone, 'at 'at such such a a time time as as this this -- -- ' ' '"it '"it is is not not meet,"' meet,"' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, rising, rising, '"that '"that every every nice nice offence offence should should bear bear its its comment!" comment!" emma, emma, i i stand stand reproved.' reproved.' 'the 'the loss, loss, micawber,' micawber,' observed observed his his wife, wife, 'has 'has been been my my family's, family's, not not yours. yours. if if my my family family are are at at length length sensible sensible of of the the deprivation deprivation to to which which their their own own conduct conduct has, has, in in the the past, past, exposed exposed them, them, and and now now desire desire to to extend extend the the hand hand of of fellowship, fellowship, let let it it not not be be repulsed.' repulsed.' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' he he returned, returned, 'so 'so be be it!' it!' 'if 'if not not for for their their sakes; sakes; for for mine, mine, micawber,' micawber,' said said his his wife. wife. 'emma,' 'emma,' he he returned, returned, 'that 'that view view of of the the question question is, is, at at such such a a moment, moment, irresistible. irresistible. i i cannot, cannot, even even now, now, distinctly distinctly pledge pledge myself myself to to fall fall upon upon your your family's family's neck; neck; but but the the member member of of your your family, family, who who is is now now in in attendance, attendance, shall shall have have no no genial genial warmth warmth frozen frozen by by me.' me.' mr. mr. micawber micawber withdrew, withdrew, and and was was absent absent some some little little time; time; in in the the course course of of which which mrs. mrs. micawber micawber was was not not wholly wholly free free from from an an apprehension apprehension that that words words might might have have arisen arisen between between him him and and the the member. member. at at length length the the same same boy boy reappeared, reappeared, and and presented presented me me with with a a note note written written in in pencil, pencil, and and headed, headed, in in a a legal legal manner, manner, 'heep 'heep v. v. micawber'. micawber'. from from this this document, document, i i learned learned that that mr. mr. micawber micawber being being again again arrested, arrested, 'was 'was in in a a final final paroxysm paroxysm of of despair; despair; and and that that he he begged begged me me to to send send him him his his knife knife and and pint pint pot, pot, by by bearer, bearer, as as they they might might prove prove serviceable serviceable during during the the brief brief remainder remainder of of his his existence, existence, in in jail. jail. he he also also requested, requested, as as a a last last act act of of friendship, friendship, that that i i would would see see his his family family to to the the parish parish workhouse, workhouse, and and forget forget that that such such a a being being ever ever lived. lived. of of course course i i answered answered this this note note by by going going down down with with the the boy boy to to pay pay the the money, money, where where i i found found mr. mr. micawber micawber sitting sitting in in a a corner, corner, looking looking darkly darkly at at the the sheriff sheriff 's 's officer officer who who had had effected effected the the capture. capture. on on his his release, release, he he embraced embraced me me with with the the utmost utmost fervour; fervour; and and made made an an entry entry of of the the transaction transaction in in his his pocket-book pocket-book -- -- being being very very particular, particular, i i recollect, recollect, about about a a halfpenny halfpenny i i inadvertently inadvertently omitted omitted from from my my statement statement of of the the total. total. this this momentous momentous pocket-book pocket-book was was a a timely timely reminder reminder to to him him of of another another transaction. transaction. on on our our return return to to the the room room upstairs upstairs (where (where he he accounted accounted for for his his absence absence by by saying saying that that it it had had been been occasioned occasioned by by circumstances circumstances over over which which he he had had no no control), control), he he took took out out of of it it a a large large sheet sheet of of paper, paper, folded folded small, small, and and quite quite covered covered with with long long sums, sums, carefully carefully worked. worked. from from the the glimpse glimpse i i had had of of them, them, i i should should say say that that i i never never saw saw such such sums sums out out of of a a school school ciphering-book. ciphering-book. these, these, it it seemed, seemed, were were calculations calculations of of compound compound interest interest on on what what he he called called 'the 'the principal principal amount amount of of forty-one, forty-one, ten, ten, eleven eleven and and a a half', half', for for various various periods. periods. after after a a careful careful consideration consideration of of these, these, and and an an elaborate elaborate estimate estimate of of his his resources, resources, he he had had come come to to the the conclusion conclusion to to select select that that sum sum which which represented represented the the amount amount with with compound compound interest interest to to two two years, years, fifteen fifteen calendar calendar months, months, and and fourteen fourteen days, days, from from that that date. date. for for this this he he had had drawn drawn a a note-of-hand note-of-hand with with great great neatness, neatness, which which he he handed handed over over to to traddles traddles on on the the spot, spot, a a discharge discharge of of his his debt debt in in full full (as (as between between man man and and man), man), with with many many acknowledgements. acknowledgements. 'i 'i have have still still a a presentiment,' presentiment,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, pensively pensively shaking shaking her her head, head, 'that 'that my my family family will will appear appear on on board, board, before before we we finally finally depart.' depart.' mr. mr. micawber micawber evidently evidently had had his his presentiment presentiment on on the the subject subject too, too, but but he he put put it it in in his his tin tin pot pot and and swallowed swallowed it. it. 'if 'if you have have any any opportunity opportunity of of sending sending letters letters home, home, on on your your passage, passage, mrs. mrs. micawber,' micawber,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'you must must let let us us hear hear from from you, you know.' know.' 'my 'my dear dear miss miss trotwood,' trotwood,' she she replied, replied, 'i 'i shall shall only only be be too too happy happy to to think think that that anyone anyone expects expects to to hear hear from from us. us. i i shall shall not not fail fail to to correspond. correspond. mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, i i trust, trust, as as an an old old and and familiar familiar friend, friend, will will not not object object to to receive receive occasional occasional intelligence, intelligence, himself, himself, from from one one who who knew knew him him when when the the twins twins were were yet yet unconscious?' unconscious?' i i said said that that i i should should hope hope to to hear, hear, whenever whenever she she had had an an opportunity opportunity of of writing. writing. 'please 'please heaven, heaven, there there will will be be many many such such opportunities,' opportunities,' said said mr. mr. micawber. micawber. 'the 'the ocean, ocean, in in these these times, times, is is a a perfect perfect fleet fleet of of ships; ships; and and we we can can hardly hardly fail fail to to encounter encounter many, many, in in running running over. over. it it is is merely merely crossing,' crossing,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, trifling trifling with with his his eye-glass, eye-glass, 'merely 'merely crossing. crossing. the the distance distance is is quite quite imaginary.' imaginary.' i i think, think, now, now, how how odd odd it it was, was, but but how how wonderfully wonderfully like like mr. mr. micawber, micawber, that, that, when when he he went went from from london london to to canterbury, canterbury, he he should should have have talked talked as as if if he he were were going going to to the the farthest farthest limits limits of of the the earth; earth; and, and, when when he he went went from from england england to to australia, australia, as as if if he he were were going going for for a a little little trip trip across across the the channel. channel. 'on 'on the the voyage, voyage, i i shall shall endeavour,' endeavour,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'occasionally 'occasionally to to spin spin them them a a yarn; yarn; and and the the melody melody of of my my son son wilkins wilkins will, will, i i trust, trust, be be acceptable acceptable at at the the galley-fire. galley-fire. when when mrs. mrs. micawber micawber has has her her sea-legs sea-legs on on -- -- an an expression expression in in which which i i hope hope there there is is no no conventional conventional impropriety impropriety -- -- she she will will give give them, them, i i dare dare say, say, "little "little tafflin". tafflin". porpoises porpoises and and dolphins, dolphins, i i believe, believe, will will be be frequently frequently observed observed athwart athwart our our bows; bows; and, and, either either on on the the starboard starboard or or the the larboard larboard quarter, quarter, objects objects of of interest interest will will be be continually continually descried. descried. in in short,' short,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, with with the the old old genteel genteel air, air, 'the 'the probability probability is, is, all all will will be be found found so so exciting, exciting, alow alow and and aloft, aloft, that that when when the the lookout, lookout, stationed stationed in in the the main-top, main-top, cries cries land-oh! land-oh! we we shall shall be be very very considerably considerably astonished!' astonished!' with with that that he he flourished flourished off off the the contents contents of of his his little little tin tin pot, pot, as as if if he he had had made made the the voyage, voyage, and and had had passed passed a a first-class first-class examination examination before before the the highest highest naval naval authorities. authorities. 'what 'what i i chiefly chiefly hope, hope, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'is, 'is, that that in in some some branches branches of of our our family family we we may may live live again again in in the the old old country. country. do do not not frown, frown, micawber! micawber! i i do do not not now now refer refer to to my my own own family, family, but but to to our our children's children's children. children. however however vigorous vigorous the the sapling,' sapling,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, shaking shaking her her head, head, 'i 'i cannot cannot forget forget the the parent-tree; parent-tree; and and when when our our race race attains attains to to eminence eminence and and fortune, fortune, i i own own i i should should wish wish that that fortune fortune to to flow flow into into the the coffers coffers of of britannia.' britannia.' 'my 'my dear,' dear,' said said mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'britannia 'britannia must must take take her her chance. chance. i i am am bound bound to to say say that that she she has has never never done done much much for for me, me, and and that that i i have have no no particular particular wish wish upon upon the the subject.' subject.' 'micawber,' 'micawber,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'there, 'there, you are are wrong. wrong. you are are going going out, out, micawber, micawber, to to this this distant distant clime, clime, to to strengthen, strengthen, not not to to weaken, weaken, the the connexion connexion between between yourself yourself and and albion.' albion.' 'the 'the connexion connexion in in question, question, my my love,' love,' rejoined rejoined mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'has 'has not not laid laid me, me, i i repeat, repeat, under under that that load load of of personal personal obligation, obligation, that that i i am am at at all all sensitive sensitive as as to to the the formation formation of of another another connexion.' connexion.' 'micawber,' 'micawber,' returned returned mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. 'there, 'there, i i again again say, say, you are are wrong. wrong. you do do not not know know your your power, power, micawber. micawber. it it is is that that which which will will strengthen, strengthen, even even in in this this step step you are are about about to to take, take, the the connexion connexion between between yourself yourself and and albion.' albion.' mr. mr. micawber micawber sat sat in in his his elbow-chair, elbow-chair, with with his his eyebrows eyebrows raised; raised; half half receiving receiving and and half half repudiating repudiating mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's views views as as they they were were stated, stated, but but very very sensible sensible of of their their foresight. foresight. 'my 'my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'i 'i wish wish mr. mr. micawber micawber to to feel feel his his position. position. it it appears appears to to me me highly highly important important that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should, should, from from the the hour hour of of his his embarkation, embarkation, feel feel his his position. position. your your old old knowledge knowledge of of me, me, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, will will have have told told you that that i i have have not not the the sanguine sanguine disposition disposition of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. my my disposition disposition is, is, if if i i may may say say so, so, eminently eminently practical. practical. i i know know that that this this is is a a long long voyage. voyage. i i know know that that it it will will involve involve many many privations privations and and inconveniences. inconveniences. i i cannot cannot shut shut my my eyes eyes to to those those facts. facts. but but i i also also know know what what mr. mr. micawber micawber is. is. i i know know the the latent latent power power of of mr. mr. micawber. micawber. and and therefore therefore i i consider consider it it vitally vitally important important that that mr. mr. micawber micawber should should feel feel his his position.' position.' 'my 'my love,' love,' he he observed, observed, 'perhaps 'perhaps you will will allow allow me me to to remark remark that that it it is is barely barely possible possible that that i i do do feel feel my my position position at at the the present present moment.' moment.' 'i 'i think think not, not, micawber,' micawber,' she she rejoined. rejoined. 'not 'not fully. fully. my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, mr. mr. micawber's micawber's is is not not a a common common case. case. mr. mr. micawber micawber is is going going to to a a distant distant country country expressly expressly in in order order that that he he may may be be fully fully understood understood and and appreciated appreciated for for the the first first time. time. i i wish wish mr. mr. micawber micawber to to take take his his stand stand upon upon that that vessel's vessel's prow, prow, and and firmly firmly say, say, "this "this country country i i am am come come to to conquer! conquer! have have you honours? honours? have have you riches? riches? have have you posts posts of of profitable profitable pecuniary pecuniary emolument? emolument? let let them them be be brought brought forward. forward. they they are are mine!"' mine!"' mr. mr. micawber, micawber, glancing glancing at at us us all, all, seemed seemed to to think think there there was was a a good good deal deal in in this this idea. idea. 'i 'i wish wish mr. mr. micawber, micawber, if if i i make make myself myself understood,' understood,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, in in her her argumentative argumentative tone, tone, 'to 'to be be the the caesar caesar of of his his own own fortunes. fortunes. that, that, my my dear dear mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, appears appears to to me me to to be be his his true true position. position. from from the the first first moment moment of of this this voyage, voyage, i i wish wish mr. mr. micawber micawber to to stand stand upon upon that that vessel's vessel's prow prow and and say, say, "enough "enough of of delay: delay: enough enough of of disappointment: disappointment: enough enough of of limited limited means. means. that that was was in in the the old old country. country. this this is is the the new. new. produce produce your your reparation. reparation. bring bring it it forward!"' forward!"' mr. mr. micawber micawber folded folded his his arms arms in in a a resolute resolute manner, manner, as as if if he he were were then then stationed stationed on on the the figure-head. figure-head. 'and 'and doing doing that,' that,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, ' ' -- -- feeling feeling his his position position -- -- am am i i not not right right in in saying saying that that mr. mr. micawber micawber will will strengthen, strengthen, and and not not weaken, weaken, his his connexion connexion with with britain? britain? an an important important public public character character arising arising in in that that hemisphere, hemisphere, shall shall i i be be told told that that its its influence influence will will not not be be felt felt at at home? home? can can i i be be so so weak weak as as to to imagine imagine that that mr. mr. micawber, micawber, wielding wielding the the rod rod of of talent talent and and of of power power in in australia, australia, will will be be nothing nothing in in england? england? i i am am but but a a woman; woman; but but i i should should be be unworthy unworthy of of myself myself and and of of my my papa, papa, if if i i were were guilty guilty of of such such absurd absurd weakness.' weakness.' mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's conviction conviction that that her her arguments arguments were were unanswerable, unanswerable, gave gave a a moral moral elevation elevation to to her her tone tone which which i i think think i i had had never never heard heard in in it it before. before. 'and 'and therefore therefore it it is,' is,' said said mrs. mrs. micawber, micawber, 'that 'that i i the the more more wish, wish, that, that, at at a a future future period, period, we we may may live live again again on on the the parent parent soil. soil. mr. mr. micawber micawber may may be be -- -- i i cannot cannot disguise disguise from from myself myself that that the the probability probability is, is, mr. mr. micawber micawber will will be be -- -- a a page page of of history; history; and and he he ought ought then then to to be be represented represented in in the the country country which which gave gave him him birth, birth, and and did did not not give give him him employment!' employment!' 'my 'my love,' love,' observed observed mr. mr. micawber, micawber, 'it 'it is is impossible impossible for for me me not not to to be be touched touched by by your your affection. affection. i i am am always always willing willing to to defer defer to to your your good good sense. sense. what what will will be be -- -- will will be. be. heaven heaven forbid forbid that that i i should should grudge grudge my my native native country country any any portion portion of of the the wealth wealth that that may may be be accumulated accumulated by by our our descendants!' descendants!' 'that's 'that's well,' well,' said said my my aunt, aunt, nodding nodding towards towards mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and i i drink drink my my love love to to you all, all, and and every every blessing blessing and and success success attend attend you!' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty put put down down the the two two children children he he had had been been nursing, nursing, one one on on each each knee, knee, to to join join mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in drinking drinking to to all all of of us us in in return; return; and and when when he he and and the the micawbers micawbers cordially cordially shook shook hands hands as as comrades, comrades, and and his his brown brown face face brightened brightened with with a a smile, smile, i i felt felt that that he he would would make make his his way, way, establish establish a a good good name, name, and and be be beloved, beloved, go go where where he he would. would. even even the the children children were were instructed, instructed, each each to to dip dip a a wooden wooden spoon spoon into into mr. mr. micawber's micawber's pot, pot, and and pledge pledge us us in in its its contents. contents. when when this this was was done, done, my my aunt aunt and and agnes agnes rose, rose, and and parted parted from from the the emigrants. emigrants. it it was was a a sorrowful sorrowful farewell. farewell. they they were were all all crying; crying; the the children children hung hung about about agnes agnes to to the the last; last; and and we we left left poor poor mrs. mrs. micawber micawber in in a a very very distressed distressed condition, condition, sobbing sobbing and and weeping weeping by by a a dim dim candle, candle, that that must must have have made made the the room room look, look, from from the the river, river, like like a a miserable miserable light-house. light-house. i i went went down down again again next next morning morning to to see see that that they they were were away. away. they they had had departed, departed, in in a a boat, boat, as as early early as as five five o'clock. o'clock. it it was was a a wonderful wonderful instance instance to to me me of of the the gap gap such such partings partings make, make, that that although although my my association association of of them them with with the the tumble-down tumble-down public-house public-house and and the the wooden wooden stairs stairs dated dated only only from from last last night, night, both both seemed seemed dreary dreary and and deserted, deserted, now now that that they they were were gone. gone. in in the the afternoon afternoon of of the the next next day, day, my my old old nurse nurse and and i i went went down down to to gravesend. gravesend. we we found found the the ship ship in in the the river, river, surrounded surrounded by by a a crowd crowd of of boats; boats; a a favourable favourable wind wind blowing; blowing; the the signal signal for for sailing sailing at at her her mast-head. mast-head. i i hired hired a a boat boat directly, directly, and and we we put put off off to to her; her; and and getting getting through through the the little little vortex vortex of of confusion confusion of of which which she she was was the the centre, centre, went went on on board. board. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was waiting waiting for for us us on on deck. deck. he he told told me me that that mr. mr. micawber micawber had had just just now now been been arrested arrested again again (and (and for for the the last last time) time) at at the the suit suit of of heep, heep, and and that, that, in in compliance compliance with with a a request request i i had had made made to to him, him, he he had had paid paid the the money, money, which which i i repaid repaid him. him. he he then then took took us us down down between between decks; decks; and and there, there, any any lingering lingering fears fears i i had had of of his his having having heard heard any any rumours rumours of of what what had had happened, happened, were were dispelled dispelled by by mr. mr. micawber's micawber's coming coming out out of of the the gloom, gloom, taking taking his his arm arm with with an an air air of of friendship friendship and and protection, protection, and and telling telling me me that that they they had had scarcely scarcely been been asunder asunder for for a a moment, moment, since since the the night night before before last. last. it it was was such such a a strange strange scene scene to to me, me, and and so so confined confined and and dark, dark, that, that, at at first, first, i i could could make make out out hardly hardly anything; anything; but, but, by by degrees, degrees, it it cleared, cleared, as as my my eyes eyes became became more more accustomed accustomed to to the the gloom, gloom, and and i i seemed seemed to to stand stand in in a a picture picture by by ostade. ostade. among among the the great great beams, beams, bulks, bulks, and and ringbolts ringbolts of of the the ship, ship, and and the the emigrant-berths, emigrant-berths, and and chests, chests, and and bundles, bundles, and and barrels, barrels, and and heaps heaps of of miscellaneous miscellaneous baggage baggage -- -- 'lighted 'lighted up, up, here here and and there, there, by by dangling dangling lanterns; lanterns; and and elsewhere elsewhere by by the the yellow yellow daylight daylight straying straying down down a a windsail windsail or or a a hatchway hatchway -- -- were were crowded crowded groups groups of of people, people, making making new new friendships, friendships, taking taking leave leave of of one one another, another, talking, talking, laughing, laughing, crying, crying, eating eating and and drinking; drinking; some, some, already already settled settled down down into into the the possession possession of of their their few few feet feet of of space, space, with with their their little little households households arranged, arranged, and and tiny tiny children children established established on on stools, stools, or or in in dwarf dwarf elbow-chairs; elbow-chairs; others, others, despairing despairing of of a a resting-place, resting-place, and and wandering wandering disconsolately. disconsolately. from from babies babies who who had had but but a a week week or or two two of of life life behind behind them, them, to to crooked crooked old old men men and and women women who who seemed seemed to to have have but but a a week week or or two two of of life life before before them; them; and and from from ploughmen ploughmen bodily bodily carrying carrying out out soil soil of of england england on on their their boots, boots, to to smiths smiths taking taking away away samples samples of of its its soot soot and and smoke smoke upon upon their their skins; skins; every every age age and and occupation occupation appeared appeared to to be be crammed crammed into into the the narrow narrow compass compass of of the the 'tween 'tween decks. decks. as as my my eye eye glanced glanced round round this this place, place, i i thought thought i i saw saw sitting, sitting, by by an an open open port, port, with with one one of of the the micawber micawber children children near near her, her, a a figure figure like like emily's; emily's; it it first first attracted attracted my my attention, attention, by by another another figure figure parting parting from from it it with with a a kiss; kiss; and and as as it it glided glided calmly calmly away away through through the the disorder, disorder, reminding reminding me me of of -- -- agnes! agnes! but but in in the the rapid rapid motion motion and and confusion, confusion, and and in in the the unsettlement unsettlement of of my my own own thoughts, thoughts, i i lost lost it it again; again; and and only only knew knew that that the the time time was was come come when when all all visitors visitors were were being being warned warned to to leave leave the the ship; ship; that that my my nurse nurse was was crying crying on on a a chest chest beside beside me; me; and and that that mrs. mrs. gummidge, gummidge, assisted assisted by by some some younger younger stooping stooping woman woman in in black, black, was was busily busily arranging arranging mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's goods. goods. 'is 'is there there any any last last wured, wured, mas'r mas'r davy?' davy?' said said he. he. 'is 'is there there any any one one forgotten forgotten thing thing afore afore we we parts?' parts?' 'one 'one thing!' thing!' said said i. i. 'martha!' 'martha!' he he touched touched the the younger younger woman woman i i have have mentioned mentioned on on the the shoulder, shoulder, and and martha martha stood stood before before me. me. 'heaven 'heaven bless bless you, you good good man!' man!' cried cried i. i. 'you take take her her with with you!' she she answered answered for for him, him, with with a a burst burst of of tears. tears. i i could could speak speak no no more more at at that that time, time, but but i i wrung wrung his his hand; hand; and and if if ever ever i i have have loved loved and and honoured honoured any any man, man, i i loved loved and and honoured honoured that that man man in in my my soul. soul. the the ship ship was was clearing clearing fast fast of of strangers. strangers. the the greatest greatest trial trial that that i i had, had, remained. remained. i i told told him him what what the the noble noble spirit spirit that that was was gone, gone, had had given given me me in in charge charge to to say say at at parting. parting. it it moved moved him him deeply. deeply. but but when when he he charged charged me, me, in in return, return, with with many many messages messages of of affection affection and and regret regret for for those those deaf deaf ears, ears, he he moved moved me me more. more. the the time time was was come. come. i i embraced embraced him, him, took took my my weeping weeping nurse nurse upon upon my my arm, arm, and and hurried hurried away. away. on on deck, deck, i i took took leave leave of of poor poor mrs. mrs. micawber. micawber. she she was was looking looking distractedly distractedly about about for for her her family, family, even even then; then; and and her her last last words words to to me me were, were, that that she she never never would would desert desert mr. mr. micawber. micawber. we we went went over over the the side side into into our our boat, boat, and and lay lay at at a a little little distance, distance, to to see see the the ship ship wafted wafted on on her her course. course. it it was was then then calm, calm, radiant radiant sunset. sunset. she she lay lay between between us, us, and and the the red red light; light; and and every every taper taper line line and and spar spar was was visible visible against against the the glow. glow. a a sight sight at at once once so so beautiful, beautiful, so so mournful, mournful, and and so so hopeful, hopeful, as as the the glorious glorious ship, ship, lying, lying, still, still, on on the the flushed flushed water, water, with with all all the the life life on on board board her her crowded crowded at at the the bulwarks, bulwarks, and and there there clustering, clustering, for for a a moment, moment, bare-headed bare-headed and and silent, silent, i i never never saw. saw. silent, silent, only only for for a a moment. moment. as as the the sails sails rose rose to to the the wind, wind, and and the the ship ship began began to to move, move, there there broke broke from from all all the the boats boats three three resounding resounding cheers, cheers, which which those those on on board board took took up, up, and and echoed echoed back, back, and and which which were were echoed echoed and and re-echoed. re-echoed. my my heart heart burst burst out out when when i i heard heard the the sound, sound, and and beheld beheld the the waving waving of of the the hats hats and and handkerchiefs handkerchiefs -- -- and and then then i i saw saw her! her! then then i i saw saw her, her, at at her her uncle's uncle's side, side, and and trembling trembling on on his his shoulder. shoulder. he he pointed pointed to to us us with with an an eager eager hand; hand; and and she she saw saw us, us, and and waved waved her her last last good-bye good-bye to to me. me. aye, aye, emily, emily, beautiful beautiful and and drooping, drooping, cling cling to to him him with with the the utmost utmost trust trust of of thy thy bruised bruised heart; heart; for for he he has has clung clung to to thee, thee, with with all all the the might might of of his his great great love! love! surrounded surrounded by by the the rosy rosy light, light, and and standing standing high high upon upon the the deck, deck, apart apart together, together, she she clinging clinging to to him, him, and and he he holding holding her, her, they they solemnly solemnly passed passed away. away. the the night night had had fallen fallen on on the the kentish kentish hills hills when when we we were were rowed rowed ashore ashore -- -- and and fallen fallen darkly darkly upon upon me. me. chapter chapter 58. 58. absence absence it it was was a a long long and and gloomy gloomy night night that that gathered gathered on on me, me, haunted haunted by by the the ghosts ghosts of of many many hopes, hopes, of of many many dear dear remembrances, remembrances, many many errors, errors, many many unavailing unavailing sorrows sorrows and and regrets. regrets. i i went went away away from from england; england; not not knowing, knowing, even even then, then, how how great great the the shock shock was, was, that that i i had had to to bear. bear. i i left left all all who who were were dear dear to to me, me, and and went went away; away; and and believed believed that that i i had had borne borne it, it, and and it it was was past. past. as as a a man man upon upon a a field field of of battle battle will will receive receive a a mortal mortal hurt, hurt, and and scarcely scarcely know know that that he he is is struck, struck, so so i, i, when when i i was was left left alone alone with with my my undisciplined undisciplined heart, heart, had had no no conception conception of of the the wound wound with with which which it it had had to to strive. strive. the the knowledge knowledge came came upon upon me, me, not not quickly, quickly, but but little little by by little, little, and and grain grain by by grain. grain. the the desolate desolate feeling feeling with with which which i i went went abroad, abroad, deepened deepened and and widened widened hourly. hourly. at at first first it it was was a a heavy heavy sense sense of of loss loss and and sorrow, sorrow, wherein wherein i i could could distinguish distinguish little little else. else. by by imperceptible imperceptible degrees, degrees, it it became became a a hopeless hopeless consciousness consciousness of of all all that that i i had had lost lost -- -- love, love, friendship, friendship, interest; interest; of of all all that that had had been been shattered shattered -- -- my my first first trust, trust, my my first first affection, affection, the the whole whole airy airy castle castle of of my my life; life; of of all all that that remained remained -- -- a a ruined ruined blank blank and and waste, waste, lying lying wide wide around around me, me, unbroken, unbroken, to to the the dark dark horizon. horizon. if if my my grief grief were were selfish, selfish, i i did did not not know know it it to to be be so. so. i i mourned mourned for for my my child-wife, child-wife, taken taken from from her her blooming blooming world, world, so so young. young. i i mourned mourned for for him him who who might might have have won won the the love love and and admiration admiration of of thousands, thousands, as as he he had had won won mine mine long long ago. ago. i i mourned mourned for for the the broken broken heart heart that that had had found found rest rest in in the the stormy stormy sea; sea; and and for for the the wandering wandering remnants remnants of of the the simple simple home, home, where where i i had had heard heard the the night-wind night-wind blowing, blowing, when when i i was was a a child. child. from from the the accumulated accumulated sadness sadness into into which which i i fell, fell, i i had had at at length length no no hope hope of of ever ever issuing issuing again. again. i i roamed roamed from from place place to to place, place, carrying carrying my my burden burden with with me me everywhere. everywhere. i i felt felt its its whole whole weight weight now; now; and and i i drooped drooped beneath beneath it, it, and and i i said said in in my my heart heart that that it it could could never never be be lightened. lightened. when when this this despondency despondency was was at at its its worst, worst, i i believed believed that that i i should should die. die. sometimes, sometimes, i i thought thought that that i i would would like like to to die die at at home; home; and and actually actually turned turned back back on on my my road, road, that that i i might might get get there there soon. soon. at at other other times, times, i i passed passed on on farther farther away, away, -- -- from from city city to to city, city, seeking seeking i i know know not not what, what, and and trying trying to to leave leave i i know know not not what what behind. behind. it it is is not not in in my my power power to to retrace, retrace, one one by by one, one, all all the the weary weary phases phases of of distress distress of of mind mind through through which which i i passed. passed. there there are are some some dreams dreams that that can can only only be be imperfectly imperfectly and and vaguely vaguely described; described; and and when when i i oblige oblige myself myself to to look look back back on on this this time time of of my my life, life, i i seem seem to to be be recalling recalling such such a a dream. dream. i i see see myself myself passing passing on on among among the the novelties novelties of of foreign foreign towns, towns, palaces, palaces, cathedrals, cathedrals, temples, temples, pictures, pictures, castles, castles, tombs, tombs, fantastic fantastic streets streets -- -- the the old old abiding abiding places places of of history history and and fancy fancy -- -- as as a a dreamer dreamer might; might; bearing bearing my my painful painful load load through through all, all, and and hardly hardly conscious conscious of of the the objects objects as as they they fade fade before before me. me. listlessness listlessness to to everything, everything, but but brooding brooding sorrow, sorrow, was was the the night night that that fell fell on on my my undisciplined undisciplined heart. heart. let let me me look look up up from from it it -- -- as as at at last last i i did, did, thank thank heaven! heaven! -- -- and and from from its its long, long, sad, sad, wretched wretched dream, dream, to to dawn. dawn. for for many many months months i i travelled travelled with with this this ever-darkening ever-darkening cloud cloud upon upon my my mind. mind. some some blind blind reasons reasons that that i i had had for for not not returning returning home home -- -- reasons reasons then then struggling struggling within within me, me, vainly, vainly, for for more more distinct distinct expression expression -- -- kept kept me me on on my my pilgrimage. pilgrimage. sometimes, sometimes, i i had had proceeded proceeded restlessly restlessly from from place place to to place, place, stopping stopping nowhere; nowhere; sometimes, sometimes, i i had had lingered lingered long long in in one one spot. spot. i i had had had had no no purpose, purpose, no no sustaining sustaining soul soul within within me, me, anywhere. anywhere. i i was was in in switzerland. switzerland. i i had had come come out out of of italy, italy, over over one one of of the the great great passes passes of of the the alps, alps, and and had had since since wandered wandered with with a a guide guide among among the the by-ways by-ways of of the the mountains. mountains. if if those those awful awful solitudes solitudes had had spoken spoken to to my my heart, heart, i i did did not not know know it. it. i i had had found found sublimity sublimity and and wonder wonder in in the the dread dread heights heights and and precipices, precipices, in in the the roaring roaring torrents, torrents, and and the the wastes wastes of of ice ice and and snow; snow; but but as as yet, yet, they they had had taught taught me me nothing nothing else. else. i i came, came, one one evening evening before before sunset, sunset, down down into into a a valley, valley, where where i i was was to to rest. rest. in in the the course course of of my my descent descent to to it, it, by by the the winding winding track track along along the the mountain-side, mountain-side, from from which which i i saw saw it it shining shining far far below, below, i i think think some some long-unwonted long-unwonted sense sense of of beauty beauty and and tranquillity, tranquillity, some some softening softening influence influence awakened awakened by by its its peace, peace, moved moved faintly faintly in in my my breast. breast. i i remember remember pausing pausing once, once, with with a a kind kind of of sorrow sorrow that that was was not not all all oppressive, oppressive, not not quite quite despairing. despairing. i i remember remember almost almost hoping hoping that that some some better better change change was was possible possible within within me. me. i i came came into into the the valley, valley, as as the the evening evening sun sun was was shining shining on on the the remote remote heights heights of of snow, snow, that that closed closed it it in, in, like like eternal eternal clouds. clouds. the the bases bases of of the the mountains mountains forming forming the the gorge gorge in in which which the the little little village village lay, lay, were were richly richly green; green; and and high high above above this this gentler gentler vegetation, vegetation, grew grew forests forests of of dark dark fir, fir, cleaving cleaving the the wintry wintry snow-drift, snow-drift, wedge-like, wedge-like, and and stemming stemming the the avalanche. avalanche. above above these, these, were were range range upon upon range range of of craggy craggy steeps, steeps, grey grey rock, rock, bright bright ice, ice, and and smooth smooth verdure-specks verdure-specks of of pasture, pasture, all all gradually gradually blending blending with with the the crowning crowning snow. snow. dotted dotted here here and and there there on on the the mountain's-side, mountain's-side, each each tiny tiny dot dot a a home, home, were were lonely lonely wooden wooden cottages, cottages, so so dwarfed dwarfed by by the the towering towering heights heights that that they they appeared appeared too too small small for for toys. toys. so so did did even even the the clustered clustered village village in in the the valley, valley, with with its its wooden wooden bridge bridge across across the the stream, stream, where where the the stream stream tumbled tumbled over over broken broken rocks, rocks, and and roared roared away away among among the the trees. trees. in in the the quiet quiet air, air, there there was was a a sound sound of of distant distant singing singing -- -- shepherd shepherd voices; voices; but, but, as as one one bright bright evening evening cloud cloud floated floated midway midway along along the the mountain's-side, mountain's-side, i i could could almost almost have have believed believed it it came came from from there, there, and and was was not not earthly earthly music. music. all all at at once, once, in in this this serenity, serenity, great great nature nature spoke spoke to to me; me; and and soothed soothed me me to to lay lay down down my my weary weary head head upon upon the the grass, grass, and and weep weep as as i i had had not not wept wept yet, yet, since since dora dora died! died! i i had had found found a a packet packet of of letters letters awaiting awaiting me me but but a a few few minutes minutes before, before, and and had had strolled strolled out out of of the the village village to to read read them them while while my my supper supper was was making making ready. ready. other other packets packets had had missed missed me, me, and and i i had had received received none none for for a a long long time. time. beyond beyond a a line line or or two, two, to to say say that that i i was was well, well, and and had had arrived arrived at at such such a a place, place, i i had had not not had had fortitude fortitude or or constancy constancy to to write write a a letter letter since since i i left left home. home. the the packet packet was was in in my my hand. hand. i i opened opened it, it, and and read read the the writing writing of of agnes. agnes. she she was was happy happy and and useful, useful, was was prospering prospering as as she she had had hoped. hoped. that that was was all all she she told told me me of of herself. herself. the the rest rest referred referred to to me. me. she she gave gave me me no no advice; advice; she she urged urged no no duty duty on on me; me; she she only only told told me, me, in in her her own own fervent fervent manner, manner, what what her her trust trust in in me me was. was. she she knew knew (she (she said) said) how how such such a a nature nature as as mine mine would would turn turn affliction affliction to to good. good. she she knew knew how how trial trial and and emotion emotion would would exalt exalt and and strengthen strengthen it. it. she she was was sure sure that that in in my my every every purpose purpose i i should should gain gain a a firmer firmer and and a a higher higher tendency, tendency, through through the the grief grief i i had had undergone. undergone. she, she, who who so so gloried gloried in in my my fame, fame, and and so so looked looked forward forward to to its its augmentation, augmentation, well well knew knew that that i i would would labour labour on. on. she she knew knew that that in in me, me, sorrow sorrow could could not not be be weakness, weakness, but but must must be be strength. strength. as as the the endurance endurance of of my my childish childish days days had had done done its its part part to to make make me me what what i i was, was, so so greater greater calamities calamities would would nerve nerve me me on, on, to to be be yet yet better better than than i i was; was; and and so, so, as as they they had had taught taught me, me, would would i i teach teach others. others. she she commended commended me me to to god, god, who who had had taken taken my my innocent innocent darling darling to to his his rest; rest; and and in in her her sisterly sisterly affection affection cherished cherished me me always, always, and and was was always always at at my my side side go go where where i i would; would; proud proud of of what what i i had had done, done, but but infinitely infinitely prouder prouder yet yet of of what what i i was was reserved reserved to to do. do. i i put put the the letter letter in in my my breast, breast, and and thought thought what what had had i i been been an an hour hour ago! ago! when when i i heard heard the the voices voices die die away, away, and and saw saw the the quiet quiet evening evening cloud cloud grow grow dim, dim, and and all all the the colours colours in in the the valley valley fade, fade, and and the the golden golden snow snow upon upon the the mountain-tops mountain-tops become become a a remote remote part part of of the the pale pale night night sky, sky, yet yet felt felt that that the the night night was was passing passing from from my my mind, mind, and and all all its its shadows shadows clearing, clearing, there there was was no no name name for for the the love love i i bore bore her, her, dearer dearer to to me, me, henceforward, henceforward, than than ever ever until until then. then. i i read read her her letter letter many many times. times. i i wrote wrote to to her her before before i i slept. slept. i i told told her her that that i i had had been been in in sore sore need need of of her her help; help; that that without without her her i i was was not, not, and and i i never never had had been, been, what what she she thought thought me; me; but but that that she she inspired inspired me me to to be be that, that, and and i i would would try. try. i i did did try. try. in in three three months months more, more, a a year year would would have have passed passed since since the the beginning beginning of of my my sorrow. sorrow. i i determined determined to to make make no no resolutions resolutions until until the the expiration expiration of of those those three three months, months, but but to to try. try. i i lived lived in in that that valley, valley, and and its its neighbourhood, neighbourhood, all all the the time. time. the the three three months months gone, gone, i i resolved resolved to to remain remain away away from from home home for for some some time time longer; longer; to to settle settle myself myself for for the the present present in in switzerland, switzerland, which which was was growing growing dear dear to to me me in in the the remembrance remembrance of of that that evening; evening; to to resume resume my my pen; pen; to to work. work. i i resorted resorted humbly humbly whither whither agnes agnes had had commended commended me; me; i i sought sought out out nature, nature, never never sought sought in in vain; vain; and and i i admitted admitted to to my my breast breast the the human human interest interest i i had had lately lately shrunk shrunk from. from. it it was was not not long, long, before before i i had had almost almost as as many many friends friends in in the the valley valley as as in in yarmouth: yarmouth: and and when when i i left left it, it, before before the the winter winter set set in, in, for for geneva, geneva, and and came came back back in in the the spring, spring, their their cordial cordial greetings greetings had had a a homely homely sound sound to to me, me, although although they they were were not not conveyed conveyed in in english english words. words. i i worked worked early early and and late, late, patiently patiently and and hard. hard. i i wrote wrote a a story, story, with with a a purpose purpose growing, growing, not not remotely, remotely, out out of of my my experience, experience, and and sent sent it it to to traddles, traddles, and and he he arranged arranged for for its its publication publication very very advantageously advantageously for for me; me; and and the the tidings tidings of of my my growing growing reputation reputation began began to to reach reach me me from from travellers travellers whom whom i i encountered encountered by by chance. chance. after after some some rest rest and and change, change, i i fell fell to to work, work, in in my my old old ardent ardent way, way, on on a a new new fancy, fancy, which which took took strong strong possession possession of of me. me. as as i i advanced advanced in in the the execution execution of of this this task, task, i i felt felt it it more more and and more, more, and and roused roused my my utmost utmost energies energies to to do do it it well. well. this this was was my my third third work work of of fiction. fiction. it it was was not not half half written, written, when, when, in in an an interval interval of of rest, rest, i i thought thought of of returning returning home. home. for for a a long long time, time, though though studying studying and and working working patiently, patiently, i i had had accustomed accustomed myself myself to to robust robust exercise. exercise. my my health, health, severely severely impaired impaired when when i i left left england, england, was was quite quite restored. restored. i i had had seen seen much. much. i i had had been been in in many many countries, countries, and and i i hope hope i i had had improved improved my my store store of of knowledge. knowledge. i i have have now now recalled recalled all all that that i i think think it it needful needful to to recall recall here, here, of of this this term term of of absence absence -- -- with with one one reservation. reservation. i i have have made made it, it, thus thus far, far, with with no no purpose purpose of of suppressing suppressing any any of of my my thoughts; thoughts; for, for, as as i i have have elsewhere elsewhere said, said, this this narrative narrative is is my my written written memory. memory. i i have have desired desired to to keep keep the the most most secret secret current current of of my my mind mind apart, apart, and and to to the the last. last. i i enter enter on on it it now. now. i i cannot cannot so so completely completely penetrate penetrate the the mystery mystery of of my my own own heart, heart, as as to to know know when when i i began began to to think think that that i i might might have have set set its its earliest earliest and and brightest brightest hopes hopes on on agnes. agnes. i i cannot cannot say say at at what what stage stage of of my my grief grief it it first first became became associated associated with with the the reflection, reflection, that, that, in in my my wayward wayward boyhood, boyhood, i i had had thrown thrown away away the the treasure treasure of of her her love. love. i i believe believe i i may may have have heard heard some some whisper whisper of of that that distant distant thought, thought, in in the the old old unhappy unhappy loss loss or or want want of of something something never never to to be be realized, realized, of of which which i i had had been been sensible. sensible. but but the the thought thought came came into into my my mind mind as as a a new new reproach reproach and and new new regret, regret, when when i i was was left left so so sad sad and and lonely lonely in in the the world. world. if, if, at at that that time, time, i i had had been been much much with with her, her, i i should, should, in in the the weakness weakness of of my my desolation, desolation, have have betrayed betrayed this. this. it it was was what what i i remotely remotely dreaded dreaded when when i i was was first first impelled impelled to to stay stay away away from from england. england. i i could could not not have have borne borne to to lose lose the the smallest smallest portion portion of of her her sisterly sisterly affection; affection; yet, yet, in in that that betrayal, betrayal, i i should should have have set set a a constraint constraint between between us us hitherto hitherto unknown. unknown. i i could could not not forget forget that that the the feeling feeling with with which which she she now now regarded regarded me me had had grown grown up up in in my my own own free free choice choice and and course. course. that that if if she she had had ever ever loved loved me me with with another another love love -- -- and and i i sometimes sometimes thought thought the the time time was was when when she she might might have have done done so so -- -- i i had had cast cast it it away. away. it it was was nothing, nothing, now, now, that that i i had had accustomed accustomed myself myself to to think think of of her, her, when when we we were were both both mere mere children, children, as as one one who who was was far far removed removed from from my my wild wild fancies. fancies. i i had had bestowed bestowed my my passionate passionate tenderness tenderness upon upon another another object; object; and and what what i i might might have have done, done, i i had had not not done; done; and and what what agnes agnes was was to to me, me, i i and and her her own own noble noble heart heart had had made made her. her. in in the the beginning beginning of of the the change change that that gradually gradually worked worked in in me, me, when when i i tried tried to to get get a a better better understanding understanding of of myself myself and and be be a a better better man, man, i i did did glance, glance, through through some some indefinite indefinite probation, probation, to to a a period period when when i i might might possibly possibly hope hope to to cancel cancel the the mistaken mistaken past, past, and and to to be be so so blessed blessed as as to to marry marry her. her. but, but, as as time time wore wore on, on, this this shadowy shadowy prospect prospect faded, faded, and and departed departed from from me. me. if if she she had had ever ever loved loved me, me, then, then, i i should should hold hold her her the the more more sacred; sacred; remembering remembering the the confidences confidences i i had had reposed reposed in in her, her, her her knowledge knowledge of of my my errant errant heart, heart, the the sacrifice sacrifice she she must must have have made made to to be be my my friend friend and and sister, sister, and and the the victory victory she she had had won. won. if if she she had had never never loved loved me, me, could could i i believe believe that that she she would would love love me me now? now? i i had had always always felt felt my my weakness, weakness, in in comparison comparison with with her her constancy constancy and and fortitude; fortitude; and and now now i i felt felt it it more more and and more. more. whatever whatever i i might might have have been been to to her, her, or or she she to to me, me, if if i i had had been been more more worthy worthy of of her her long long ago, ago, i i was was not not now, now, and and she she was was not. not. the the time time was was past. past. i i had had let let it it go go by, by, and and had had deservedly deservedly lost lost her. her. that that i i suffered suffered much much in in these these contentions, contentions, that that they they filled filled me me with with unhappiness unhappiness and and remorse, remorse, and and yet yet that that i i had had a a sustaining sustaining sense sense that that it it was was required required of of me, me, in in right right and and honour, honour, to to keep keep away away from from myself, myself, with with shame, shame, the the thought thought of of turning turning to to the the dear dear girl girl in in the the withering withering of of my my hopes, hopes, from from whom whom i i had had frivolously frivolously turned turned when when they they were were bright bright and and fresh fresh -- -- which which consideration consideration was was at at the the root root of of every every thought thought i i had had concerning concerning her her -- -- is is all all equally equally true. true. i i made made no no effort effort to to conceal conceal from from myself, myself, now, now, that that i i loved loved her, her, that that i i was was devoted devoted to to her; her; but but i i brought brought the the assurance assurance home home to to myself, myself, that that it it was was now now too too late, late, and and that that our our long-subsisting long-subsisting relation relation must must be be undisturbed. undisturbed. i i had had thought, thought, much much and and often, often, of of my my dora's dora's shadowing shadowing out out to to me me what what might might have have happened, happened, in in those those years years that that were were destined destined not not to to try try us; us; i i had had considered considered how how the the things things that that never never happen, happen, are are often often as as much much realities realities to to us, us, in in their their effects, effects, as as those those that that are are accomplished. accomplished. the the very very years years she she spoke spoke of, of, were were realities realities now, now, for for my my correction; correction; and and would would have have been, been, one one day, day, a a little little later later perhaps, perhaps, though though we we had had parted parted in in our our earliest earliest folly. folly. i i endeavoured endeavoured to to convert convert what what might might have have been been between between myself myself and and agnes, agnes, into into a a means means of of making making me me more more self-denying, self-denying, more more resolved, resolved, more more conscious conscious of of myself, myself, and and my my defects defects and and errors. errors. thus, thus, through through the the reflection reflection that that it it might might have have been, been, i i arrived arrived at at the the conviction conviction that that it it could could never never be. be. these, these, with with their their perplexities perplexities and and inconsistencies, inconsistencies, were were the the shifting shifting quicksands quicksands of of my my mind, mind, from from the the time time of of my my departure departure to to the the time time of of my my return return home, home, three three years years afterwards. afterwards. three three years years had had elapsed elapsed since since the the sailing sailing of of the the emigrant emigrant ship; ship; when, when, at at that that same same hour hour of of sunset, sunset, and and in in the the same same place, place, i i stood stood on on the the deck deck of of the the packet packet vessel vessel that that brought brought me me home, home, looking looking on on the the rosy rosy water water where where i i had had seen seen the the image image of of that that ship ship reflected. reflected. three three years. years. long long in in the the aggregate, aggregate, though though short short as as they they went went by. by. and and home home was was very very dear dear to to me, me, and and agnes agnes too too -- -- but but she she was was not not mine mine -- -- she she was was never never to to be be mine. mine. she she might might have have been, been, but but that that was was past! past! chapter chapter 59. 59. return return i i landed landed in in london london on on a a wintry wintry autumn autumn evening. evening. it it was was dark dark and and raining, raining, and and i i saw saw more more fog fog and and mud mud in in a a minute minute than than i i had had seen seen in in a a year. year. i i walked walked from from the the custom custom house house to to the the monument monument before before i i found found a a coach; coach; and and although although the the very very house-fronts, house-fronts, looking looking on on the the swollen swollen gutters, gutters, were were like like old old friends friends to to me, me, i i could could not not but but admit admit that that they they were were very very dingy dingy friends. friends. i i have have often often remarked remarked -- -- i i suppose suppose everybody everybody has has -- -- that that one's one's going going away away from from a a familiar familiar place, place, would would seem seem to to be be the the signal signal for for change change in in it. it. as as i i looked looked out out of of the the coach coach window, window, and and observed observed that that an an old old house house on on fish-street fish-street hill, hill, which which had had stood stood untouched untouched by by painter, painter, carpenter, carpenter, or or bricklayer, bricklayer, for for a a century, century, had had been been pulled pulled down down in in my my absence; absence; and and that that a a neighbouring neighbouring street, street, of of time-honoured time-honoured insalubrity insalubrity and and inconvenience, inconvenience, was was being being drained drained and and widened; widened; i i half half expected expected to to find find st. st. paul's paul's cathedral cathedral looking looking older. older. for for some some changes changes in in the the fortunes fortunes of of my my friends, friends, i i was was prepared. prepared. my my aunt aunt had had long long been been re-established re-established at at dover, dover, and and traddles traddles had had begun begun to to get get into into some some little little practice practice at at the the bar, bar, in in the the very very first first term term after after my my departure. departure. he he had had chambers chambers in in gray's gray's inn, inn, now; now; and and had had told told me, me, in in his his last last letters, letters, that that he he was was not not without without hopes hopes of of being being soon soon united united to to the the dearest dearest girl girl in in the the world. world. they they expected expected me me home home before before christmas; christmas; but but had had no no idea idea of of my my returning returning so so soon. soon. i i had had purposely purposely misled misled them, them, that that i i might might have have the the pleasure pleasure of of taking taking them them by by surprise. surprise. and and yet, yet, i i was was perverse perverse enough enough to to feel feel a a chill chill and and disappointment disappointment in in receiving receiving no no welcome, welcome, and and rattling, rattling, alone alone and and silent, silent, through through the the misty misty streets. streets. the the well-known well-known shops, shops, however, however, with with their their cheerful cheerful lights, lights, did did something something for for me; me; and and when when i i alighted alighted at at the the door door of of the the gray's gray's inn inn coffee-house, coffee-house, i i had had recovered recovered my my spirits. spirits. it it recalled, recalled, at at first, first, that that so-different so-different time time when when i i had had put put up up at at the the golden golden cross, cross, and and reminded reminded me me of of the the changes changes that that had had come come to to pass pass since since then; then; but but that that was was natural. natural. 'do 'do you know know where where mr. mr. traddles traddles lives lives in in the the inn?' inn?' i i asked asked the the waiter, waiter, as as i i warmed warmed myself myself by by the the coffee-room coffee-room fire. fire. 'holborn 'holborn court, court, sir. sir. number number two.' two.' 'mr. 'mr. traddles traddles has has a a rising rising reputation reputation among among the the lawyers, lawyers, i i believe?' believe?' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' returned returned the the waiter, waiter, 'probably 'probably he he has, has, sir; sir; but but i i am am not not aware aware of of it it myself.' myself.' this this waiter, waiter, who who was was middle-aged middle-aged and and spare, spare, looked looked for for help help to to a a waiter waiter of of more more authority authority -- -- a a stout, stout, potential potential old old man, man, with with a a double double chin, chin, in in black black breeches breeches and and stockings, stockings, who who came came out out of of a a place place like like a a churchwarden's churchwarden's pew, pew, at at the the end end of of the the coffee-room, coffee-room, where where he he kept kept company company with with a a cash-box, cash-box, a a directory, directory, a a law-list, law-list, and and other other books books and and papers. papers. 'mr. 'mr. traddles,' traddles,' said said the the spare spare waiter. waiter. 'number 'number two two in in the the court.' court.' the the potential potential waiter waiter waved waved him him away, away, and and turned, turned, gravely, gravely, to to me. me. 'i 'i was was inquiring,' inquiring,' said said i, i, 'whether 'whether mr. mr. traddles, traddles, at at number number two two in in the the court, court, has has not not a a rising rising reputation reputation among among the the lawyers?' lawyers?' 'never 'never heard heard his his name,' name,' said said the the waiter, waiter, in in a a rich rich husky husky voice. voice. i i felt felt quite quite apologetic apologetic for for traddles. traddles. 'he's 'he's a a young young man, man, sure?' sure?' said said the the portentous portentous waiter, waiter, fixing fixing his his eyes eyes severely severely on on me. me. 'how 'how long long has has he he been been in in the the inn?' inn?' 'not 'not above above three three years,' years,' said said i. i. the the waiter, waiter, who who i i supposed supposed had had lived lived in in his his churchwarden's churchwarden's pew pew for for forty forty years, years, could could not not pursue pursue such such an an insignificant insignificant subject. subject. he he asked asked me me what what i i would would have have for for dinner? dinner? i i felt felt i i was was in in england england again, again, and and really really was was quite quite cast cast down down on on traddles's traddles's account. account. there there seemed seemed to to be be no no hope hope for for him. him. i i meekly meekly ordered ordered a a bit bit of of fish fish and and a a steak, steak, and and stood stood before before the the fire fire musing musing on on his his obscurity. obscurity. as as i i followed followed the the chief chief waiter waiter with with my my eyes, eyes, i i could could not not help help thinking thinking that that the the garden garden in in which which he he had had gradually gradually blown blown to to be be the the flower flower he he was, was, was was an an arduous arduous place place to to rise rise in. in. it it had had such such a a prescriptive, prescriptive, stiff-necked, stiff-necked, long-established, long-established, solemn, solemn, elderly elderly air. air. i i glanced glanced about about the the room, room, which which had had had had its its sanded sanded floor floor sanded, sanded, no no doubt, doubt, in in exactly exactly the the same same manner manner when when the the chief chief waiter waiter was was a a boy boy -- -- if if he he ever ever was was a a boy, boy, which which appeared appeared improbable; improbable; and and at at the the shining shining tables, tables, where where i i saw saw myself myself reflected, reflected, in in unruffled unruffled depths depths of of old old mahogany; mahogany; and and at at the the lamps, lamps, without without a a flaw flaw in in their their trimming trimming or or cleaning; cleaning; and and at at the the comfortable comfortable green green curtains, curtains, with with their their pure pure brass brass rods, rods, snugly snugly enclosing enclosing the the boxes; boxes; and and at at the the two two large large coal coal fires, fires, brightly brightly burning; burning; and and at at the the rows rows of of decanters, decanters, burly burly as as if if with with the the consciousness consciousness of of pipes pipes of of expensive expensive old old port port wine wine below; below; and and both both england, england, and and the the law, law, appeared appeared to to me me to to be be very very difficult difficult indeed indeed to to be be taken taken by by storm. storm. i i went went up up to to my my bedroom bedroom to to change change my my wet wet clothes; clothes; and and the the vast vast extent extent of of that that old old wainscoted wainscoted apartment apartment (which (which was was over over the the archway archway leading leading to to the the inn, inn, i i remember), remember), and and the the sedate sedate immensity immensity of of the the four-post four-post bedstead, bedstead, and and the the indomitable indomitable gravity gravity of of the the chests chests of of drawers, drawers, all all seemed seemed to to unite unite in in sternly sternly frowning frowning on on the the fortunes fortunes of of traddles, traddles, or or on on any any such such daring daring youth. youth. i i came came down down again again to to my my dinner; dinner; and and even even the the slow slow comfort comfort of of the the meal, meal, and and the the orderly orderly silence silence of of the the place place -- -- which which was was bare bare of of guests, guests, the the long long vacation vacation not not yet yet being being over over -- -- were were eloquent eloquent on on the the audacity audacity of of traddles, traddles, and and his his small small hopes hopes of of a a livelihood livelihood for for twenty twenty years years to to come. come. i i had had seen seen nothing nothing like like this this since since i i went went away, away, and and it it quite quite dashed dashed my my hopes hopes for for my my friend. friend. the the chief chief waiter waiter had had had had enough enough of of me. me. he he came came near near me me no no more; more; but but devoted devoted himself himself to to an an old old gentleman gentleman in in long long gaiters, gaiters, to to meet meet whom whom a a pint pint of of special special port port seemed seemed to to come come out out of of the the cellar cellar of of its its own own accord, accord, for for he he gave gave no no order. order. the the second second waiter waiter informed informed me, me, in in a a whisper, whisper, that that this this old old gentleman gentleman was was a a retired retired conveyancer conveyancer living living in in the the square, square, and and worth worth a a mint mint of of money, money, which which it it was was expected expected he he would would leave leave to to his his laundress's laundress's daughter; daughter; likewise likewise that that it it was was rumoured rumoured that that he he had had a a service service of of plate plate in in a a bureau, bureau, all all tarnished tarnished with with lying lying by, by, though though more more than than one one spoon spoon and and a a fork fork had had never never yet yet been been beheld beheld in in his his chambers chambers by by mortal mortal vision. vision. by by this this time, time, i i quite quite gave gave traddles traddles up up for for lost; lost; and and settled settled in in my my own own mind mind that that there there was was no no hope hope for for him. him. being being very very anxious anxious to to see see the the dear dear old old fellow, fellow, nevertheless, nevertheless, i i dispatched dispatched my my dinner, dinner, in in a a manner manner not not at at all all calculated calculated to to raise raise me me in in the the opinion opinion of of the the chief chief waiter, waiter, and and hurried hurried out out by by the the back back way. way. number number two two in in the the court court was was soon soon reached; reached; and and an an inscription inscription on on the the door-post door-post informing informing me me that that mr. mr. traddles traddles occupied occupied a a set set of of chambers chambers on on the the top top storey, storey, i i ascended ascended the the staircase. staircase. a a crazy crazy old old staircase staircase i i found found it it to to be, be, feebly feebly lighted lighted on on each each landing landing by by a a club club -- -- headed headed little little oil oil wick, wick, dying dying away away in in a a little little dungeon dungeon of of dirty dirty glass. glass. in in the the course course of of my my stumbling stumbling upstairs, upstairs, i i fancied fancied i i heard heard a a pleasant pleasant sound sound of of laughter; laughter; and and not not the the laughter laughter of of an an attorney attorney or or barrister, barrister, or or attorney's attorney's clerk clerk or or barrister's barrister's clerk, clerk, but but of of two two or or three three merry merry girls. girls. happening, happening, however, however, as as i i stopped stopped to to listen, listen, to to put put my my foot foot in in a a hole hole where where the the honourable honourable society society of of gray's gray's inn inn had had left left a a plank plank deficient, deficient, i i fell fell down down with with some some noise, noise, and and when when i i recovered recovered my my footing footing all all was was silent. silent. groping groping my my way way more more carefully, carefully, for for the the rest rest of of the the journey, journey, my my heart heart beat beat high high when when i i found found the the outer outer door, door, which which had had mr. mr. traddles traddles painted painted on on it, it, open. open. i i knocked. knocked. a a considerable considerable scuffling scuffling within within ensued, ensued, but but nothing nothing else. else. i i therefore therefore knocked knocked again. again. a a small small sharp-looking sharp-looking lad, lad, half-footboy half-footboy and and half-clerk, half-clerk, who who was was very very much much out out of of breath, breath, but but who who looked looked at at me me as as if if he he defied defied me me to to prove prove it it legally, legally, presented presented himself. himself. 'is 'is mr. mr. traddles traddles within?' within?' i i said. said. 'yes, 'yes, sir, sir, but but he's he's engaged.' engaged.' 'i 'i want want to to see see him.' him.' after after a a moment's moment's survey survey of of me, me, the the sharp-looking sharp-looking lad lad decided decided to to let let me me in; in; and and opening opening the the door door wider wider for for that that purpose, purpose, admitted admitted me, me, first, first, into into a a little little closet closet of of a a hall, hall, and and next next into into a a little little sitting-room; sitting-room; where where i i came came into into the the presence presence of of my my old old friend friend (also (also out out of of breath), breath), seated seated at at a a table, table, and and bending bending over over papers. papers. 'good 'good god!' god!' cried cried traddles, traddles, looking looking up. up. 'it's 'it's copperfield!' copperfield!' and and rushed rushed into into my my arms, arms, where where i i held held him him tight. tight. 'all 'all well, well, my my dear dear traddles?' traddles?' 'all 'all well, well, my my dear, dear, dear dear copperfield, copperfield, and and nothing nothing but but good good news!' news!' we we cried cried with with pleasure, pleasure, both both of of us. us. 'my 'my dear dear fellow,' fellow,' said said traddles, traddles, rumpling rumpling his his hair hair in in his his excitement, excitement, which which was was a a most most unnecessary unnecessary operation, operation, 'my 'my dearest dearest copperfield, copperfield, my my long-lost long-lost and and most most welcome welcome friend, friend, how how glad glad i i am am to to see see you! how how brown brown you are! are! how how glad glad i i am! am! upon upon my my life life and and honour, honour, i i never never was was so so rejoiced, rejoiced, my my beloved beloved copperfield, copperfield, never!' never!' i i was was equally equally at at a a loss loss to to express express my my emotions. emotions. i i was was quite quite unable unable to to speak, speak, at at first. first. 'my 'my dear dear fellow!' fellow!' said said traddles. traddles. 'and 'and grown grown so so famous! famous! my my glorious glorious copperfield! copperfield! good good gracious gracious me, me, when when did did you come, come, where where have have you come come from, from, what what have have you been been doing?' doing?' never never pausing pausing for for an an answer answer to to anything anything he he said, said, traddles, traddles, who who had had clapped clapped me me into into an an easy-chair easy-chair by by the the fire, fire, all all this this time time impetuously impetuously stirred stirred the the fire fire with with one one hand, hand, and and pulled pulled at at my my neck-kerchief neck-kerchief with with the the other, other, under under some some wild wild delusion delusion that that it it was was a a great-coat. great-coat. without without putting putting down down the the poker, poker, he he now now hugged hugged me me again; again; and and i i hugged hugged him; him; and, and, both both laughing, laughing, and and both both wiping wiping our our eyes, eyes, we we both both sat sat down, down, and and shook shook hands hands across across the the hearth. hearth. 'to 'to think,' think,' said said traddles, traddles, 'that 'that you should should have have been been so so nearly nearly coming coming home home as as you must must have have been, been, my my dear dear old old boy, boy, and and not not at at the the ceremony!' ceremony!' 'what 'what ceremony, ceremony, my my dear dear traddles?' traddles?' 'good 'good gracious gracious me!' me!' cried cried traddles, traddles, opening opening his his eyes eyes in in his his old old way. way. 'didn't 'didn't you get get my my last last letter?' letter?' 'certainly 'certainly not, not, if if it it referred referred to to any any ceremony.' ceremony.' 'why, 'why, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, sticking sticking his his hair hair upright upright with with both both hands, hands, and and then then putting putting his his hands hands on on my my knees, knees, 'i 'i am am married!' married!' 'married!' 'married!' i i cried cried joyfully. joyfully. 'lord 'lord bless bless me, me, yes!' yes!' said said traddles traddles -- -- 'by 'by the the reverend reverend horace horace -- -- to to sophy sophy -- -- down down in in devonshire. devonshire. why, why, my my dear dear boy, boy, she's she's behind behind the the window window curtain! curtain! look look here!' here!' to to my my amazement, amazement, the the dearest dearest girl girl in in the the world world came came at at that that same same instant, instant, laughing laughing and and blushing, blushing, from from her her place place of of concealment. concealment. and and a a more more cheerful, cheerful, amiable, amiable, honest, honest, happy, happy, bright-looking bright-looking bride, bride, i i believe believe (as (as i i could could not not help help saying saying on on the the spot) spot) the the world world never never saw. saw. i i kissed kissed her her as as an an old old acquaintance acquaintance should, should, and and wished wished them them joy joy with with all all my my might might of of heart. heart. 'dear 'dear me,' me,' said said traddles, traddles, 'what 'what a a delightful delightful re-union re-union this this is! is! you are are so so extremely extremely brown, brown, my my dear dear copperfield! copperfield! god god bless bless my my soul, soul, how how happy happy i i am!' am!' 'and 'and so so am am i,' i,' said said i. i. 'and 'and i i am am sure sure i i am!' am!' said said the the blushing blushing and and laughing laughing sophy. sophy. 'we 'we are are all all as as happy happy as as possible!' possible!' said said traddles. traddles. 'even 'even the the girls girls are are happy. happy. dear dear me, me, i i declare declare i i forgot forgot them!' them!' 'forgot?' 'forgot?' said said i. i. 'the 'the girls,' girls,' said said traddles. traddles. 'sophy's 'sophy's sisters. sisters. they they are are staying staying with with us. us. they they have have come come to to have have a a peep peep at at london. london. the the fact fact is, is, when when -- -- was was it it you that that tumbled tumbled upstairs, upstairs, copperfield?' copperfield?' 'it 'it was,' was,' said said i, i, laughing. laughing. 'well 'well then, then, when when you tumbled tumbled upstairs,' upstairs,' said said traddles, traddles, 'i 'i was was romping romping with with the the girls. girls. in in point point of of fact, fact, we we were were playing playing at at puss puss in in the the corner. corner. but but as as that that wouldn't wouldn't do do in in westminster westminster hall, hall, and and as as it it wouldn't wouldn't look look quite quite professional professional if if they they were were seen seen by by a a client, client, they they decamped. decamped. and and they they are are now now -- -- listening, listening, i i have have no no doubt,' doubt,' said said traddles, traddles, glancing glancing at at the the door door of of another another room. room. 'i 'i am am sorry,' sorry,' said said i, i, laughing laughing afresh, afresh, 'to 'to have have occasioned occasioned such such a a dispersion.' dispersion.' 'upon 'upon my my word,' word,' rejoined rejoined traddles, traddles, greatly greatly delighted, delighted, 'if 'if you had had seen seen them them running running away, away, and and running running back back again, again, after after you had had knocked, knocked, to to pick pick up up the the combs combs they they had had dropped dropped out out of of their their hair, hair, and and going going on on in in the the maddest maddest manner, manner, you wouldn't wouldn't have have said said so. so. my my love, love, will will you fetch fetch the the girls?' girls?' sophy sophy tripped tripped away, away, and and we we heard heard her her received received in in the the adjoining adjoining room room with with a a peal peal of of laughter. laughter. 'really 'really musical, musical, isn't isn't it, it, my my dear dear copperfield?' copperfield?' said said traddles. traddles. 'it's 'it's very very agreeable agreeable to to hear. hear. it it quite quite lights lights up up these these old old rooms. rooms. to to an an unfortunate unfortunate bachelor bachelor of of a a fellow fellow who who has has lived lived alone alone all all his his life, life, you know, know, it's it's positively positively delicious. delicious. it's it's charming. charming. poor poor things, things, they they have have had had a a great great loss loss in in sophy sophy -- -- who, who, i i do do assure assure you, copperfield copperfield is, is, and and ever ever was, was, the the dearest dearest girl! girl! -- -- and and it it gratifies gratifies me me beyond beyond expression expression to to find find them them in in such such good good spirits. spirits. the the society society of of girls girls is is a a very very delightful delightful thing, thing, copperfield. copperfield. it's it's not not professional, professional, but but it's it's very very delightful.' delightful.' observing observing that that he he slightly slightly faltered, faltered, and and comprehending comprehending that that in in the the goodness goodness of of his his heart heart he he was was fearful fearful of of giving giving me me some some pain pain by by what what he he had had said, said, i i expressed expressed my my concurrence concurrence with with a a heartiness heartiness that that evidently evidently relieved relieved and and pleased pleased him him greatly. greatly. 'but 'but then,' then,' said said traddles, traddles, 'our 'our domestic domestic arrangements arrangements are, are, to to say say the the truth, truth, quite quite unprofessional unprofessional altogether, altogether, my my dear dear copperfield. copperfield. even even sophy's sophy's being being here, here, is is unprofessional. unprofessional. and and we we have have no no other other place place of of abode. abode. we we have have put put to to sea sea in in a a cockboat, cockboat, but but we we are are quite quite prepared prepared to to rough rough it. it. and and sophy's sophy's an an extraordinary extraordinary manager! manager! you'll you'll be be surprised surprised how how those those girls girls are are stowed stowed away. away. i i am am sure sure i i hardly hardly know know how how it's it's done!' done!' 'are 'are many many of of the the young young ladies ladies with with you?' i i inquired. inquired. 'the 'the eldest, eldest, the the beauty beauty is is here,' here,' said said traddles, traddles, in in a a low low confidential confidential voice, voice, 'caroline. 'caroline. and and sarah's sarah's here here -- -- the the one one i i mentioned mentioned to to you as as having having something something the the matter matter with with her her spine, spine, you know. know. immensely immensely better! better! and and the the two two youngest youngest that that sophy sophy educated educated are are with with us. us. and and louisa's louisa's here.' here.' 'indeed!' 'indeed!' cried cried i. i. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said traddles. traddles. 'now 'now the the whole whole set set -- -- i i mean mean the the chambers chambers -- -- is is only only three three rooms; rooms; but but sophy sophy arranges arranges for for the the girls girls in in the the most most wonderful wonderful way, way, and and they they sleep sleep as as comfortably comfortably as as possible. possible. three three in in that that room,' room,' said said traddles, traddles, pointing. pointing. 'two 'two in in that.' that.' i i could could not not help help glancing glancing round, round, in in search search of of the the accommodation accommodation remaining remaining for for mr. mr. and and mrs. mrs. traddles. traddles. traddles traddles understood understood me. me. 'well!' 'well!' said said traddles, traddles, 'we 'we are are prepared prepared to to rough rough it, it, as as i i said said just just now, now, and and we we did did improvise improvise a a bed bed last last week, week, upon upon the the floor floor here. here. but but there's there's a a little little room room in in the the roof roof -- -- a a very very nice nice room, room, when when you're you're up up there there -- -- which which sophy sophy papered papered herself, herself, to to surprise surprise me; me; and and that's that's our our room room at at present. present. it's it's a a capital capital little little gipsy gipsy sort sort of of place. place. there's there's quite quite a a view view from from it.' it.' 'and 'and you are are happily happily married married at at last, last, my my dear dear traddles!' traddles!' said said i. i. 'how 'how rejoiced rejoiced i i am!' am!' 'thank 'thank you, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' said said traddles, traddles, as as we we shook shook hands hands once once more. more. 'yes, 'yes, i i am am as as happy happy as as it's it's possible possible to to be. be. there's there's your your old old friend, friend, you see,' see,' said said traddles, traddles, nodding nodding triumphantly triumphantly at at the the flower-pot flower-pot and and stand; stand; 'and 'and there's there's the the table table with with the the marble marble top! top! all all the the other other furniture furniture is is plain plain and and serviceable, serviceable, you perceive. perceive. and and as as to to plate, plate, lord lord bless bless you, we we haven't haven't so so much much as as a a tea-spoon.' tea-spoon.' 'all 'all to to be be earned?' earned?' said said i, i, cheerfully. cheerfully. 'exactly 'exactly so,' so,' replied replied traddles, traddles, 'all 'all to to be be earned. earned. of of course course we we have have something something in in the the shape shape of of tea-spoons, tea-spoons, because because we we stir stir our our tea. tea. but but they're they're britannia britannia metal.' metal.' 'the 'the silver silver will will be be the the brighter brighter when when it it comes,' comes,' said said i. i. 'the 'the very very thing thing we we say!' say!' cried cried traddles. traddles. 'you see, see, my my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' falling falling again again into into the the low low confidential confidential tone, tone, 'after 'after i i had had delivered delivered my my argument argument in in doe doe dem. dem. jipes jipes versus versus wigziell, wigziell, which which did did me me great great service service with with the the profession, profession, i i went went down down into into devonshire, devonshire, and and had had some some serious serious conversation conversation in in private private with with the the reverend reverend horace. horace. i i dwelt dwelt upon upon the the fact fact that that sophy sophy -- -- who who i i do do assure assure you, copperfield, copperfield, is is the the dearest dearest girl! girl! -- -- ' ' 'i 'i am am certain certain she she is!' is!' said said i. i. 'she 'she is, is, indeed!' indeed!' rejoined rejoined traddles. traddles. 'but 'but i i am am afraid afraid i i am am wandering wandering from from the the subject. subject. did did i i mention mention the the reverend reverend horace?' horace?' 'you said said that that you dwelt dwelt upon upon the the fact fact -- -- ' ' 'true! 'true! upon upon the the fact fact that that sophy sophy and and i i had had been been engaged engaged for for a a long long period, period, and and that that sophy, sophy, with with the the permission permission of of her her parents, parents, was was more more than than content content to to take take me me -- -- in in short,' short,' said said traddles, traddles, with with his his old old frank frank smile, smile, 'on 'on our our present present britannia-metal britannia-metal footing. footing. very very well. well. i i then then proposed proposed to to the the reverend reverend horace horace -- -- who who is is a a most most excellent excellent clergyman, clergyman, copperfield, copperfield, and and ought ought to to be be a a bishop; bishop; or or at at least least ought ought to to have have enough enough to to live live upon, upon, without without pinching pinching himself himself -- -- that that if if i i could could turn turn the the corner, corner, say say of of two two hundred hundred and and fifty fifty pounds, pounds, in in one one year; year; and and could could see see my my way way pretty pretty clearly clearly to to that, that, or or something something better, better, next next year; year; and and could could plainly plainly furnish furnish a a little little place place like like this, this, besides; besides; then, then, and and in in that that case, case, sophy sophy and and i i should should be be united. united. i i took took the the liberty liberty of of representing representing that that we we had had been been patient patient for for a a good good many many years; years; and and that that the the circumstance circumstance of of sophy's sophy's being being extraordinarily extraordinarily useful useful at at home, home, ought ought not not to to operate operate with with her her affectionate affectionate parents, parents, against against her her establishment establishment in in life life -- -- don't don't you see?' see?' 'certainly 'certainly it it ought ought not,' not,' said said i. i. 'i 'i am am glad glad you think think so, so, copperfield,' copperfield,' rejoined rejoined traddles, traddles, 'because, 'because, without without any any imputation imputation on on the the reverend reverend horace, horace, i i do do think think parents, parents, and and brothers, brothers, and and so so forth, forth, are are sometimes sometimes rather rather selfish selfish in in such such cases. cases. well! well! i i also also pointed pointed out, out, that that my my most most earnest earnest desire desire was, was, to to be be useful useful to to the the family; family; and and that that if if i i got got on on in in the the world, world, and and anything anything should should happen happen to to him him -- -- i i refer refer to to the the reverend reverend horace horace -- -- ' ' 'i 'i understand,' understand,' said said i. i. ' ' -- -- or or to to mrs. mrs. crewler crewler -- -- it it would would be be the the utmost utmost gratification gratification of of my my wishes, wishes, to to be be a a parent parent to to the the girls. girls. he he replied replied in in a a most most admirable admirable manner, manner, exceedingly exceedingly flattering flattering to to my my feelings, feelings, and and undertook undertook to to obtain obtain the the consent consent of of mrs. mrs. crewler crewler to to this this arrangement. arrangement. they they had had a a dreadful dreadful time time of of it it with with her. her. it it mounted mounted from from her her legs legs into into her her chest, chest, and and then then into into her her head head -- -- ' ' 'what 'what mounted?' mounted?' i i asked. asked. 'her 'her grief,' grief,' replied replied traddles, traddles, with with a a serious serious look. look. 'her 'her feelings feelings generally. generally. as as i i mentioned mentioned on on a a former former occasion, occasion, she she is is a a very very superior superior woman, woman, but but has has lost lost the the use use of of her her limbs. limbs. whatever whatever occurs occurs to to harass harass her, her, usually usually settles settles in in her her legs; legs; but but on on this this occasion occasion it it mounted mounted to to the the chest, chest, and and then then to to the the head, head, and, and, in in short, short, pervaded pervaded the the whole whole system system in in a a most most alarming alarming manner. manner. however, however, they they brought brought her her through through it it by by unremitting unremitting and and affectionate affectionate attention; attention; and and we we were were married married yesterday yesterday six six weeks. weeks. you have have no no idea idea what what a a monster monster i i felt, felt, copperfield, copperfield, when when i i saw saw the the whole whole family family crying crying and and fainting fainting away away in in every every direction! direction! mrs. mrs. crewler crewler couldn't couldn't see see me me before before we we left left -- -- couldn't couldn't forgive forgive me, me, then, then, for for depriving depriving her her of of her her child child -- -- but but she she is is a a good good creature, creature, and and has has done done so so since. since. i i had had a a delightful delightful letter letter from from her, her, only only this this morning.' morning.' 'and 'and in in short, short, my my dear dear friend,' friend,' said said i, i, 'you feel feel as as blest blest as as you deserve deserve to to feel!' feel!' 'oh! 'oh! that's that's your your partiality!' partiality!' laughed laughed traddles. traddles. 'but, 'but, indeed, indeed, i i am am in in a a most most enviable enviable state. state. i i work work hard, hard, and and read read law law insatiably. insatiably. i i get get up up at at five five every every morning, morning, and and don't don't mind mind it it at at all. all. i i hide hide the the girls girls in in the the daytime, daytime, and and make make merry merry with with them them in in the the evening. evening. and and i i assure assure you i i am am quite quite sorry sorry that that they they are are going going home home on on tuesday, tuesday, which which is is the the day day before before the the first first day day of of michaelmas michaelmas term. term. but but here,' here,' said said traddles, traddles, breaking breaking off off in in his his confidence, confidence, and and speaking speaking aloud, aloud, 'are 'are the the girls! girls! mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, miss miss crewler crewler -- -- miss miss sarah sarah -- -- miss miss louisa louisa -- -- margaret margaret and and lucy!' lucy!' they they were were a a perfect perfect nest nest of of roses; roses; they they looked looked so so wholesome wholesome and and fresh. fresh. they they were were all all pretty, pretty, and and miss miss caroline caroline was was very very handsome; handsome; but but there there was was a a loving, loving, cheerful, cheerful, fireside fireside quality quality in in sophy's sophy's bright bright looks, looks, which which was was better better than than that, that, and and which which assured assured me me that that my my friend friend had had chosen chosen well. well. we we all all sat sat round round the the fire; fire; while while the the sharp sharp boy, boy, who who i i now now divined divined had had lost lost his his breath breath in in putting putting the the papers papers out, out, cleared cleared them them away away again, again, and and produced produced the the tea-things. tea-things. after after that, that, he he retired retired for for the the night, night, shutting shutting the the outer outer door door upon upon us us with with a a bang. bang. mrs. mrs. traddles, traddles, with with perfect perfect pleasure pleasure and and composure composure beaming beaming from from her her household household eyes, eyes, having having made made the the tea, tea, then then quietly quietly made made the the toast toast as as she she sat sat in in a a corner corner by by the the fire. fire. she she had had seen seen agnes, agnes, she she told told me me while while she she was was toasting. toasting. 'tom' 'tom' had had taken taken her her down down into into kent kent for for a a wedding wedding trip, trip, and and there there she she had had seen seen my my aunt, aunt, too; too; and and both both my my aunt aunt and and agnes agnes were were well, well, and and they they had had all all talked talked of of nothing nothing but but me. me. 'tom' 'tom' had had never never had had me me out out of of his his thoughts, thoughts, she she really really believed, believed, all all the the time time i i had had been been away. away. 'tom' 'tom' was was the the authority authority for for everything. everything. 'tom' 'tom' was was evidently evidently the the idol idol of of her her life; life; never never to to be be shaken shaken on on his his pedestal pedestal by by any any commotion; commotion; always always to to be be believed believed in, in, and and done done homage homage to to with with the the whole whole faith faith of of her her heart, heart, come come what what might. might. the the deference deference which which both both she she and and traddles traddles showed showed towards towards the the beauty, beauty, pleased pleased me me very very much. much. i i don't don't know know that that i i thought thought it it very very reasonable; reasonable; but but i i thought thought it it very very delightful, delightful, and and essentially essentially a a part part of of their their character. character. if if traddles traddles ever ever for for an an instant instant missed missed the the tea-spoons tea-spoons that that were were still still to to be be won, won, i i have have no no doubt doubt it it was was when when he he handed handed the the beauty beauty her her tea. tea. if if his his sweet-tempered sweet-tempered wife wife could could have have got got up up any any self-assertion self-assertion against against anyone, anyone, i i am am satisfied satisfied it it could could only only have have been been because because she she was was the the beauty's beauty's sister. sister. a a few few slight slight indications indications of of a a rather rather petted petted and and capricious capricious manner, manner, which which i i observed observed in in the the beauty, beauty, were were manifestly manifestly considered, considered, by by traddles traddles and and his his wife, wife, as as her her birthright birthright and and natural natural endowment. endowment. if if she she had had been been born born a a queen queen bee, bee, and and they they labouring labouring bees, bees, they they could could not not have have been been more more satisfied satisfied of of that. that. but but their their self-forgetfulness self-forgetfulness charmed charmed me. me. their their pride pride in in these these girls, girls, and and their their submission submission of of themselves themselves to to all all their their whims, whims, was was the the pleasantest pleasantest little little testimony testimony to to their their own own worth worth i i could could have have desired desired to to see. see. if if traddles traddles were were addressed addressed as as 'a 'a darling', darling', once once in in the the course course of of that that evening; evening; and and besought besought to to bring bring something something here, here, or or carry carry something something there, there, or or take take something something up, up, or or put put something something down, down, or or find find something, something, or or fetch fetch something, something, he he was was so so addressed, addressed, by by one one or or other other of of his his sisters-in-law, sisters-in-law, at at least least twelve twelve times times in in an an hour. hour. neither neither could could they they do do anything anything without without sophy. sophy. somebody's somebody's hair hair fell fell down, down, and and nobody nobody but but sophy sophy could could put put it it up. up. somebody somebody forgot forgot how how a a particular particular tune tune went, went, and and nobody nobody but but sophy sophy could could hum hum that that tune tune right. right. somebody somebody wanted wanted to to recall recall the the name name of of a a place place in in devonshire, devonshire, and and only only sophy sophy knew knew it. it. something something was was wanted wanted to to be be written written home, home, and and sophy sophy alone alone could could be be trusted trusted to to write write before before breakfast breakfast in in the the morning. morning. somebody somebody broke broke down down in in a a piece piece of of knitting, knitting, and and no no one one but but sophy sophy was was able able to to put put the the defaulter defaulter in in the the right right direction. direction. they they were were entire entire mistresses mistresses of of the the place, place, and and sophy sophy and and traddles traddles waited waited on on them. them. how how many many children children sophy sophy could could have have taken taken care care of of in in her her time, time, i i can't can't imagine; imagine; but but she she seemed seemed to to be be famous famous for for knowing knowing every every sort sort of of song song that that ever ever was was addressed addressed to to a a child child in in the the english english tongue; tongue; and and she she sang sang dozens dozens to to order order with with the the clearest clearest little little voice voice in in the the world, world, one one after after another another (every (every sister sister issuing issuing directions directions for for a a different different tune, tune, and and the the beauty beauty generally generally striking striking in in last), last), so so that that i i was was quite quite fascinated. fascinated. the the best best of of all all was, was, that, that, in in the the midst midst of of their their exactions, exactions, all all the the sisters sisters had had a a great great tenderness tenderness and and respect respect both both for for sophy sophy and and traddles. traddles. i i am am sure, sure, when when i i took took my my leave, leave, and and traddles traddles was was coming coming out out to to walk walk with with me me to to the the coffee-house, coffee-house, i i thought thought i i had had never never seen seen an an obstinate obstinate head head of of hair, hair, or or any any other other head head of of hair, hair, rolling rolling about about in in such such a a shower shower of of kisses. kisses. altogether, altogether, it it was was a a scene scene i i could could not not help help dwelling dwelling on on with with pleasure, pleasure, for for a a long long time time after after i i got got back back and and had had wished wished traddles traddles good good night. night. if if i i had had beheld beheld a a thousand thousand roses roses blowing blowing in in a a top top set set of of chambers, chambers, in in that that withered withered gray's gray's inn, inn, they they could could not not have have brightened brightened it it half half so so much. much. the the idea idea of of those those devonshire devonshire girls, girls, among among the the dry dry law-stationers law-stationers and and the the attorneys' attorneys' offices; offices; and and of of the the tea tea and and toast, toast, and and children's children's songs, songs, in in that that grim grim atmosphere atmosphere of of pounce pounce and and parchment, parchment, red-tape, red-tape, dusty dusty wafers, wafers, ink-jars, ink-jars, brief brief and and draft draft paper, paper, law law reports, reports, writs, writs, declarations, declarations, and and bills bills of of costs; costs; seemed seemed almost almost as as pleasantly pleasantly fanciful fanciful as as if if i i had had dreamed dreamed that that the the sultan's sultan's famous famous family family had had been been admitted admitted on on the the roll roll of of attorneys, attorneys, and and had had brought brought the the talking talking bird, bird, the the singing singing tree, tree, and and the the golden golden water water into into gray's gray's inn inn hall. hall. somehow, somehow, i i found found that that i i had had taken taken leave leave of of traddles traddles for for the the night, night, and and come come back back to to the the coffee-house, coffee-house, with with a a great great change change in in my my despondency despondency about about him. him. i i began began to to think think he he would would get get on, on, in in spite spite of of all all the the many many orders orders of of chief chief waiters waiters in in england. england. drawing drawing a a chair chair before before one one of of the the coffee-room coffee-room fires fires to to think think about about him him at at my my leisure, leisure, i i gradually gradually fell fell from from the the consideration consideration of of his his happiness happiness to to tracing tracing prospects prospects in in the the live-coals, live-coals, and and to to thinking, thinking, as as they they broke broke and and changed, changed, of of the the principal principal vicissitudes vicissitudes and and separations separations that that had had marked marked my my life. life. i i had had not not seen seen a a coal coal fire, fire, since since i i had had left left england england three three years years ago: ago: though though many many a a wood wood fire fire had had i i watched, watched, as as it it crumbled crumbled into into hoary hoary ashes, ashes, and and mingled mingled with with the the feathery feathery heap heap upon upon the the hearth, hearth, which which not not inaptly inaptly figured figured to to me, me, in in my my despondency, despondency, my my own own dead dead hopes. hopes. i i could could think think of of the the past past now, now, gravely, gravely, but but not not bitterly; bitterly; and and could could contemplate contemplate the the future future in in a a brave brave spirit. spirit. home, home, in in its its best best sense, sense, was was for for me me no no more. more. she she in in whom whom i i might might have have inspired inspired a a dearer dearer love, love, i i had had taught taught to to be be my my sister. sister. she she would would marry, marry, and and would would have have new new claimants claimants on on her her tenderness; tenderness; and and in in doing doing it, it, would would never never know know the the love love for for her her that that had had grown grown up up in in my my heart. heart. it it was was right right that that i i should should pay pay the the forfeit forfeit of of my my headlong headlong passion. passion. what what i i reaped, reaped, i i had had sown. sown. i i was was thinking. thinking. and and had had i i truly truly disciplined disciplined my my heart heart to to this, this, and and could could i i resolutely resolutely bear bear it, it, and and calmly calmly hold hold the the place place in in her her home home which which she she had had calmly calmly held held in in mine, mine, -- -- when when i i found found my my eyes eyes resting resting on on a a countenance countenance that that might might have have arisen arisen out out of of the the fire, fire, in in its its association association with with my my early early remembrances. remembrances. little little mr. mr. chillip chillip the the doctor, doctor, to to whose whose good good offices offices i i was was indebted indebted in in the the very very first first chapter chapter of of this this history, history, sat sat reading reading a a newspaper newspaper in in the the shadow shadow of of an an opposite opposite corner. corner. he he was was tolerably tolerably stricken stricken in in years years by by this this time; time; but, but, being being a a mild, mild, meek, meek, calm calm little little man, man, had had worn worn so so easily, easily, that that i i thought thought he he looked looked at at that that moment moment just just as as he he might might have have looked looked when when he he sat sat in in our our parlour, parlour, waiting waiting for for me me to to be be born. born. mr. mr. chillip chillip had had left left blunderstone blunderstone six six or or seven seven years years ago, ago, and and i i had had never never seen seen him him since. since. he he sat sat placidly placidly perusing perusing the the newspaper, newspaper, with with his his little little head head on on one one side, side, and and a a glass glass of of warm warm sherry sherry negus negus at at his his elbow. elbow. he he was was so so extremely extremely conciliatory conciliatory in in his his manner manner that that he he seemed seemed to to apologize apologize to to the the very very newspaper newspaper for for taking taking the the liberty liberty of of reading reading it. it. i i walked walked up up to to where where he he was was sitting, sitting, and and said, said, 'how 'how do do you do, do, mr. mr. chillip?' chillip?' he he was was greatly greatly fluttered fluttered by by this this unexpected unexpected address address from from a a stranger, stranger, and and replied, replied, in in his his slow slow way, way, 'i 'i thank thank you, sir, sir, you are are very very good. good. thank thank you, sir. sir. i i hope hope you are are well.' well.' 'you don't don't remember remember me?' me?' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip, chillip, smiling smiling very very meekly, meekly, and and shaking shaking his his head head as as he he surveyed surveyed me, me, 'i 'i have have a a kind kind of of an an impression impression that that something something in in your your countenance countenance is is familiar familiar to to me, me, sir; sir; but but i i couldn't couldn't lay lay my my hand hand upon upon your your name, name, really.' really.' 'and 'and yet yet you knew knew it, it, long long before before i i knew knew it it myself,' myself,' i i returned. returned. 'did 'did i i indeed, indeed, sir?' sir?' said said mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'is 'is it it possible possible that that i i had had the the honour, honour, sir, sir, of of officiating officiating when when -- -- ?' ?' 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i. i. 'dear 'dear me!' me!' cried cried mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'but 'but no no doubt doubt you are are a a good good deal deal changed changed since since then, then, sir?' sir?' 'probably,' 'probably,' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' observed observed mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'i 'i hope hope you'll you'll excuse excuse me, me, if if i i am am compelled compelled to to ask ask the the favour favour of of your your name?' name?' on on my my telling telling him him my my name, name, he he was was really really moved. moved. he he quite quite shook shook hands hands with with me me -- -- which which was was a a violent violent proceeding proceeding for for him, him, his his usual usual course course being being to to slide slide a a tepid tepid little little fish-slice, fish-slice, an an inch inch or or two two in in advance advance of of his his hip, hip, and and evince evince the the greatest greatest discomposure discomposure when when anybody anybody grappled grappled with with it. it. even even now, now, he he put put his his hand hand in in his his coat-pocket coat-pocket as as soon soon as as he he could could disengage disengage it, it, and and seemed seemed relieved relieved when when he he had had got got it it safe safe back. back. 'dear 'dear me, me, sir!' sir!' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, surveying surveying me me with with his his head head on on one one side. side. 'and 'and it's it's mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, is is it? it? well, well, sir, sir, i i think think i i should should have have known known you, if if i i had had taken taken the the liberty liberty of of looking looking more more closely closely at at you. there's there's a a strong strong resemblance resemblance between between you and and your your poor poor father, father, sir.' sir.' 'i 'i never never had had the the happiness happiness of of seeing seeing my my father,' father,' i i observed. observed. 'very 'very true, true, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, in in a a soothing soothing tone. tone. 'and 'and very very much much to to be be deplored deplored it it was, was, on on all all accounts! accounts! we we are are not not ignorant, ignorant, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, slowly slowly shaking shaking his his little little head head again, again, 'down 'down in in our our part part of of the the country, country, of of your your fame. fame. there there must must be be great great excitement excitement here, here, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, tapping tapping himself himself on on the the forehead forehead with with his his forefinger. forefinger. 'you must must find find it it a a trying trying occupation, occupation, sir!' sir!' 'what 'what is is your your part part of of the the country country now?' now?' i i asked, asked, seating seating myself myself near near him. him. 'i 'i am am established established within within a a few few miles miles of of bury bury st. st. edmund's, edmund's, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'mrs. 'mrs. chillip, chillip, coming coming into into a a little little property property in in that that neighbourhood, neighbourhood, under under her her father's father's will, will, i i bought bought a a practice practice down down there, there, in in which which you will will be be glad glad to to hear hear i i am am doing doing well. well. my my daughter daughter is is growing growing quite quite a a tall tall lass lass now, now, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, giving giving his his little little head head another another little little shake. shake. 'her 'her mother mother let let down down two two tucks tucks in in her her frocks frocks only only last last week. week. such such is is time, time, you see, see, sir!' sir!' as as the the little little man man put put his his now now empty empty glass glass to to his his lips, lips, when when he he made made this this reflection, reflection, i i proposed proposed to to him him to to have have it it refilled, refilled, and and i i would would keep keep him him company company with with another. another. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' he he returned, returned, in in his his slow slow way, way, 'it's 'it's more more than than i i am am accustomed accustomed to; to; but but i i can't can't deny deny myself myself the the pleasure pleasure of of your your conversation. conversation. it it seems seems but but yesterday yesterday that that i i had had the the honour honour of of attending attending you in in the the measles. measles. you came came through through them them charmingly, charmingly, sir!' sir!' i i acknowledged acknowledged this this compliment, compliment, and and ordered ordered the the negus, negus, which which was was soon soon produced. produced. 'quite 'quite an an uncommon uncommon dissipation!' dissipation!' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, stirring stirring it, it, 'but 'but i i can't can't resist resist so so extraordinary extraordinary an an occasion. occasion. you have have no no family, family, sir?' sir?' i i shook shook my my head. head. 'i 'i was was aware aware that that you sustained sustained a a bereavement, bereavement, sir, sir, some some time time ago,' ago,' said said mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'i 'i heard heard it it from from your your father-in-law's father-in-law's sister. sister. very very decided decided character character there, there, sir?' sir?' 'why, 'why, yes,' yes,' said said i, i, 'decided 'decided enough. enough. where where did did you see see her, her, mr. mr. chillip?' chillip?' 'are 'are you not not aware, aware, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. chillip, chillip, with with his his placidest placidest smile, smile, 'that 'that your your father-in-law father-in-law is is again again a a neighbour neighbour of of mine?' mine?' 'no,' 'no,' said said i. i. 'he 'he is is indeed, indeed, sir!' sir!' said said mr. mr. chillip. chillip. 'married 'married a a young young lady lady of of that that part, part, with with a a very very good good little little property, property, poor poor thing. thing. -- -- -and -and this this action action of of the the brain brain now, now, sir? sir? don't don't you find find it it fatigue fatigue you?' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, looking looking at at me me like like an an admiring admiring robin. robin. i i waived waived that that question, question, and and returned returned to to the the murdstones. murdstones. 'i 'i was was aware aware of of his his being being married married again. again. do do you attend attend the the family?' family?' i i asked. asked. 'not 'not regularly. regularly. i i have have been been called called in,' in,' he he replied. replied. 'strong 'strong phrenological phrenological developments developments of of the the organ organ of of firmness, firmness, in in mr. mr. murdstone murdstone and and his his sister, sister, sir.' sir.' i i replied replied with with such such an an expressive expressive look, look, that that mr. mr. chillip chillip was was emboldened emboldened by by that, that, and and the the negus negus together, together, to to give give his his head head several several short short shakes, shakes, and and thoughtfully thoughtfully exclaim, exclaim, 'ah, 'ah, dear dear me! me! we we remember remember old old times, times, mr. mr. copperfield!' copperfield!' 'and 'and the the brother brother and and sister sister are are pursuing pursuing their their old old course, course, are are they?' they?' said said i. i. 'well, 'well, sir,' sir,' replied replied mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'a 'a medical medical man, man, being being so so much much in in families, families, ought ought to to have have neither neither eyes eyes nor nor ears ears for for anything anything but but his his profession. profession. still, still, i i must must say, say, they they are are very very severe, severe, sir: sir: both both as as to to this this life life and and the the next.' next.' 'the 'the next next will will be be regulated regulated without without much much reference reference to to them, them, i i dare dare say,' say,' i i returned: returned: 'what 'what are are they they doing doing as as to to this?' this?' mr. mr. chillip chillip shook shook his his head, head, stirred stirred his his negus, negus, and and sipped sipped it. it. 'she 'she was was a a charming charming woman, woman, sir!' sir!' he he observed observed in in a a plaintive plaintive manner. manner. 'the 'the present present mrs. mrs. murdstone?' murdstone?' a a charming charming woman woman indeed, indeed, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip; chillip; 'as 'as amiable, amiable, i i am am sure, sure, as as it it was was possible possible to to be! be! mrs. mrs. chillip's chillip's opinion opinion is, is, that that her her spirit spirit has has been been entirely entirely broken broken since since her her marriage, marriage, and and that that she she is is all all but but melancholy melancholy mad. mad. and and the the ladies,' ladies,' observed observed mr. mr. chillip, chillip, timorously, timorously, 'are 'are great great observers, observers, sir.' sir.' 'i 'i suppose suppose she she was was to to be be subdued subdued and and broken broken to to their their detestable detestable mould, mould, heaven heaven help help her!' her!' said said i. i. 'and 'and she she has has been.' been.' 'well, 'well, sir, sir, there there were were violent violent quarrels quarrels at at first, first, i i assure assure you,' said said mr. mr. chillip; chillip; 'but 'but she she is is quite quite a a shadow shadow now. now. would would it it be be considered considered forward forward if if i i was was to to say say to to you, sir, sir, in in confidence, confidence, that that since since the the sister sister came came to to help, help, the the brother brother and and sister sister between between them them have have nearly nearly reduced reduced her her to to a a state state of of imbecility?' imbecility?' i i told told him him i i could could easily easily believe believe it. it. 'i 'i have have no no hesitation hesitation in in saying,' saying,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, fortifying fortifying himself himself with with another another sip sip of of negus, negus, 'between 'between you and and me, me, sir, sir, that that her her mother mother died died of of it it -- -- or or that that tyranny, tyranny, gloom, gloom, and and worry worry have have made made mrs. mrs. murdstone murdstone nearly nearly imbecile. imbecile. she she was was a a lively lively young young woman, woman, sir, sir, before before marriage, marriage, and and their their gloom gloom and and austerity austerity destroyed destroyed her. her. they they go go about about with with her, her, now, now, more more like like her her keepers keepers than than her her husband husband and and sister-in-law. sister-in-law. that that was was mrs. mrs. chillip's chillip's remark remark to to me, me, only only last last week. week. and and i i assure assure you, sir, sir, the the ladies ladies are are great great observers. observers. mrs. mrs. chillip chillip herself herself is is a a great great observer!' observer!' 'does 'does he he gloomily gloomily profess profess to to be be (i (i am am ashamed ashamed to to use use the the word word in in such such association) association) religious religious still?' still?' i i inquired. inquired. 'you anticipate, anticipate, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, his his eyelids eyelids getting getting quite quite red red with with the the unwonted unwonted stimulus stimulus in in which which he he was was indulging. indulging. 'one 'one of of mrs. mrs. chillip's chillip's most most impressive impressive remarks. remarks. mrs. mrs. chillip,' chillip,' he he proceeded, proceeded, in in the the calmest calmest and and slowest slowest manner, manner, 'quite 'quite electrified electrified me, me, by by pointing pointing out out that that mr. mr. murdstone murdstone sets sets up up an an image image of of himself, himself, and and calls calls it it the the divine divine nature. nature. you might might have have knocked knocked me me down down on on the the flat flat of of my my back, back, sir, sir, with with the the feather feather of of a a pen, pen, i i assure assure you, when when mrs. mrs. chillip chillip said said so. so. the the ladies ladies are are great great observers, observers, sir?' sir?' 'intuitively,' 'intuitively,' said said i, i, to to his his extreme extreme delight. delight. 'i 'i am am very very happy happy to to receive receive such such support support in in my my opinion, opinion, sir,' sir,' he he rejoined. rejoined. 'it 'it is is not not often often that that i i venture venture to to give give a a non-medical non-medical opinion, opinion, i i assure assure you. mr. mr. murdstone murdstone delivers delivers public public addresses addresses sometimes, sometimes, and and it it is is said, said, -- -- in in short, short, sir, sir, it it is is said said by by mrs. mrs. chillip, chillip, -- -- that that the the darker darker tyrant tyrant he he has has lately lately been, been, the the more more ferocious ferocious is is his his doctrine.' doctrine.' 'i 'i believe believe mrs. mrs. chillip chillip to to be be perfectly perfectly right,' right,' said said i. i. 'mrs. 'mrs. chillip chillip does does go go so so far far as as to to say,' say,' pursued pursued the the meekest meekest of of little little men, men, much much encouraged, encouraged, 'that 'that what what such such people people miscall miscall their their religion, religion, is is a a vent vent for for their their bad bad humours humours and and arrogance. arrogance. and and do do you know know i i must must say, say, sir,' sir,' he he continued, continued, mildly mildly laying laying his his head head on on one one side, side, 'that 'that i i don't don't find find authority authority for for mr. mr. and and miss miss murdstone murdstone in in the the new new testament?' testament?' 'i 'i never never found found it it either!' either!' said said i. i. 'in 'in the the meantime, meantime, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. chillip, chillip, 'they 'they are are much much disliked; disliked; and and as as they they are are very very free free in in consigning consigning everybody everybody who who dislikes dislikes them them to to perdition, perdition, we we really really have have a a good good deal deal of of perdition perdition going going on on in in our our neighbourhood! neighbourhood! however, however, as as mrs. mrs. chillip chillip says, says, sir, sir, they they undergo undergo a a continual continual punishment; punishment; for for they they are are turned turned inward, inward, to to feed feed upon upon their their own own hearts, hearts, and and their their own own hearts hearts are are very very bad bad feeding. feeding. now, now, sir, sir, about about that that brain brain of of yours, yours, if if you'll you'll excuse excuse my my returning returning to to it. it. don't don't you expose expose it it to to a a good good deal deal of of excitement, excitement, sir?' sir?' i i found found it it not not difficult, difficult, in in the the excitement excitement of of mr. mr. chillip's chillip's own own brain, brain, under under his his potations potations of of negus, negus, to to divert divert his his attention attention from from this this topic topic to to his his own own affairs, affairs, on on which, which, for for the the next next half-hour, half-hour, he he was was quite quite loquacious; loquacious; giving giving me me to to understand, understand, among among other other pieces pieces of of information, information, that that he he was was then then at at the the gray's gray's inn inn coffee-house coffee-house to to lay lay his his professional professional evidence evidence before before a a commission commission of of lunacy, lunacy, touching touching the the state state of of mind mind of of a a patient patient who who had had become become deranged deranged from from excessive excessive drinking. drinking. 'and 'and i i assure assure you, sir,' sir,' he he said, said, 'i 'i am am extremely extremely nervous nervous on on such such occasions. occasions. i i could could not not support support being being what what is is called called bullied, bullied, sir. sir. it it would would quite quite unman unman me. me. do do you know know it it was was some some time time before before i i recovered recovered the the conduct conduct of of that that alarming alarming lady, lady, on on the the night night of of your your birth, birth, mr. mr. copperfield?' copperfield?' i i told told him him that that i i was was going going down down to to my my aunt, aunt, the the dragon dragon of of that that night, night, early early in in the the morning; morning; and and that that she she was was one one of of the the most most tender-hearted tender-hearted and and excellent excellent of of women, women, as as he he would would know know full full well well if if he he knew knew her her better. better. the the mere mere notion notion of of the the possibility possibility of of his his ever ever seeing seeing her her again, again, appeared appeared to to terrify terrify him. him. he he replied replied with with a a small small pale pale smile, smile, 'is 'is she she so, so, indeed, indeed, sir? sir? really?' really?' and and almost almost immediately immediately called called for for a a candle, candle, and and went went to to bed, bed, as as if if he he were were not not quite quite safe safe anywhere anywhere else. else. he he did did not not actually actually stagger stagger under under the the negus; negus; but but i i should should think think his his placid placid little little pulse pulse must must have have made made two two or or three three more more beats beats in in a a minute, minute, than than it it had had done done since since the the great great night night of of my my aunt's aunt's disappointment, disappointment, when when she she struck struck at at him him with with her her bonnet. bonnet. thoroughly thoroughly tired, tired, i i went went to to bed bed too, too, at at midnight; midnight; passed passed the the next next day day on on the the dover dover coach; coach; burst burst safe safe and and sound sound into into my my aunt's aunt's old old parlour parlour while while she she was was at at tea tea (she (she wore wore spectacles spectacles now); now); and and was was received received by by her, her, and and mr. mr. dick, dick, and and dear dear old old peggotty, peggotty, who who acted acted as as housekeeper, housekeeper, with with open open arms arms and and tears tears of of joy. joy. my my aunt aunt was was mightily mightily amused, amused, when when we we began began to to talk talk composedly, composedly, by by my my account account of of my my meeting meeting with with mr. mr. chillip, chillip, and and of of his his holding holding her her in in such such dread dread remembrance; remembrance; and and both both she she and and peggotty peggotty had had a a great great deal deal to to say say about about my my poor poor mother's mother's second second husband, husband, and and 'that 'that murdering murdering woman woman of of a a sister', sister', -- -- on on whom whom i i think think no no pain pain or or penalty penalty would would have have induced induced my my aunt aunt to to bestow bestow any any christian christian or or proper proper name, name, or or any any other other designation. designation. chapter chapter 60. 60. agnes agnes my my aunt aunt and and i, i, when when we we were were left left alone, alone, talked talked far far into into the the night. night. how how the the emigrants emigrants never never wrote wrote home, home, otherwise otherwise than than cheerfully cheerfully and and hopefully; hopefully; how how mr. mr. micawber micawber had had actually actually remitted remitted divers divers small small sums sums of of money, money, on on account account of of those those 'pecuniary 'pecuniary liabilities', liabilities', in in reference reference to to which which he he had had been been so so business-like business-like as as between between man man and and man; man; how how janet, janet, returning returning into into my my aunt's aunt's service service when when she she came came back back to to dover, dover, had had finally finally carried carried out out her her renunciation renunciation of of mankind mankind by by entering entering into into wedlock wedlock with with a a thriving thriving tavern-keeper; tavern-keeper; and and how how my my aunt aunt had had finally finally set set her her seal seal on on the the same same great great principle, principle, by by aiding aiding and and abetting abetting the the bride, bride, and and crowning crowning the the marriage-ceremony marriage-ceremony with with her her presence; presence; were were among among our our topics topics -- -- already already more more or or less less familiar familiar to to me me through through the the letters letters i i had had had. had. mr. mr. dick, dick, as as usual, usual, was was not not forgotten. forgotten. my my aunt aunt informed informed me me how how he he incessantly incessantly occupied occupied himself himself in in copying copying everything everything he he could could lay lay his his hands hands on, on, and and kept kept king king charles charles the the first first at at a a respectful respectful distance distance by by that that semblance semblance of of employment; employment; how how it it was was one one of of the the main main joys joys and and rewards rewards of of her her life life that that he he was was free free and and happy, happy, instead instead of of pining pining in in monotonous monotonous restraint; restraint; and and how how (as (as a a novel novel general general conclusion) conclusion) nobody nobody but but she she could could ever ever fully fully know know what what he he was. was. 'and 'and when, when, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, patting patting the the back back of of my my hand, hand, as as we we sat sat in in our our old old way way before before the the fire, fire, 'when 'when are are you going going over over to to canterbury?' canterbury?' 'i 'i shall shall get get a a horse, horse, and and ride ride over over tomorrow tomorrow morning, morning, aunt, aunt, unless unless you will will go go with with me?' me?' 'no!' 'no!' said said my my aunt, aunt, in in her her short short abrupt abrupt way. way. 'i 'i mean mean to to stay stay where where i i am.' am.' then, then, i i should should ride, ride, i i said. said. i i could could not not have have come come through through canterbury canterbury today today without without stopping, stopping, if if i i had had been been coming coming to to anyone anyone but but her. her. she she was was pleased, pleased, but but answered, answered, 'tut, 'tut, trot; trot; my my old old bones bones would would have have kept kept till till tomorrow!' tomorrow!' and and softly softly patted patted my my hand hand again, again, as as i i sat sat looking looking thoughtfully thoughtfully at at the the fire. fire. thoughtfully, thoughtfully, for for i i could could not not be be here here once once more, more, and and so so near near agnes, agnes, without without the the revival revival of of those those regrets regrets with with which which i i had had so so long long been been occupied. occupied. softened softened regrets regrets they they might might be, be, teaching teaching me me what what i i had had failed failed to to learn learn when when my my younger younger life life was was all all before before me, me, but but not not the the less less regrets. regrets. 'oh, 'oh, trot,' trot,' i i seemed seemed to to hear hear my my aunt aunt say say once once more; more; and and i i understood understood her her better better now now -- -- 'blind, 'blind, blind, blind, blind!' blind!' we we both both kept kept silence silence for for some some minutes. minutes. when when i i raised raised my my eyes, eyes, i i found found that that she she was was steadily steadily observant observant of of me. me. perhaps perhaps she she had had followed followed the the current current of of my my mind; mind; for for it it seemed seemed to to me me an an easy easy one one to to track track now, now, wilful wilful as as it it had had been been once. once. 'you will will find find her her father father a a white-haired white-haired old old man,' man,' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'though 'though a a better better man man in in all all other other respects respects -- -- a a reclaimed reclaimed man. man. neither neither will will you find find him him measuring measuring all all human human interests, interests, and and joys, joys, and and sorrows, sorrows, with with his his one one poor poor little little inch-rule inch-rule now. now. trust trust me, me, child, child, such such things things must must shrink shrink very very much, much, before before they they can can be be measured measured off off in in that that way.' way.' 'indeed 'indeed they they must,' must,' said said i. i. 'you will will find find her,' her,' pursued pursued my my aunt, aunt, 'as 'as good, good, as as beautiful, beautiful, as as earnest, earnest, as as disinterested, disinterested, as as she she has has always always been. been. if if i i knew knew higher higher praise, praise, trot, trot, i i would would bestow bestow it it on on her.' her.' there there was was no no higher higher praise praise for for her; her; no no higher higher reproach reproach for for me. me. oh, oh, how how had had i i strayed strayed so so far far away! away! 'if 'if she she trains trains the the young young girls girls whom whom she she has has about about her, her, to to be be like like herself,' herself,' said said my my aunt, aunt, earnest earnest even even to to the the filling filling of of her her eyes eyes with with tears, tears, 'heaven 'heaven knows, knows, her her life life will will be be well well employed! employed! useful useful and and happy, happy, as as she she said said that that day! day! how how could could she she be be otherwise otherwise than than useful useful and and happy!' happy!' 'has 'has agnes agnes any any -- -- ' ' i i was was thinking thinking aloud, aloud, rather rather than than speaking. speaking. 'well? 'well? hey? hey? any any what?' what?' said said my my aunt, aunt, sharply. sharply. 'any 'any lover,' lover,' said said i. i. 'a 'a score,' score,' cried cried my my aunt, aunt, with with a a kind kind of of indignant indignant pride. pride. 'she 'she might might have have married married twenty twenty times, times, my my dear, dear, since since you have have been been gone!' gone!' 'no 'no doubt,' doubt,' said said i. i. 'no 'no doubt. doubt. but but has has she she any any lover lover who who is is worthy worthy of of her? her? agnes agnes could could care care for for no no other.' other.' my my aunt aunt sat sat musing musing for for a a little little while, while, with with her her chin chin upon upon her her hand. hand. slowly slowly raising raising her her eyes eyes to to mine, mine, she she said: said: 'i 'i suspect suspect she she has has an an attachment, attachment, trot.' trot.' 'a 'a prosperous prosperous one?' one?' said said i. i. 'trot,' 'trot,' returned returned my my aunt aunt gravely, gravely, 'i 'i can't can't say. say. i i have have no no right right to to tell tell you even even so so much. much. she she has has never never confided confided it it to to me, me, but but i i suspect suspect it.' it.' she she looked looked so so attentively attentively and and anxiously anxiously at at me me (i (i even even saw saw her her tremble), tremble), that that i i felt felt now, now, more more than than ever, ever, that that she she had had followed followed my my late late thoughts. thoughts. i i summoned summoned all all the the resolutions resolutions i i had had made, made, in in all all those those many many days days and and nights, nights, and and all all those those many many conflicts conflicts of of my my heart. heart. 'if 'if it it should should be be so,' so,' i i began, began, 'and 'and i i hope hope it it is-' is-' 'i 'i don't don't know know that that it it is,' is,' said said my my aunt aunt curtly. curtly. 'you must must not not be be ruled ruled by by my my suspicions. suspicions. you must must keep keep them them secret. secret. they they are are very very slight, slight, perhaps. perhaps. i i have have no no right right to to speak.' speak.' 'if 'if it it should should be be so,' so,' i i repeated, repeated, 'agnes 'agnes will will tell tell me me at at her her own own good good time. time. a a sister sister to to whom whom i i have have confided confided so so much, much, aunt, aunt, will will not not be be reluctant reluctant to to confide confide in in me.' me.' my my aunt aunt withdrew withdrew her her eyes eyes from from mine, mine, as as slowly slowly as as she she had had turned turned them them upon upon me; me; and and covered covered them them thoughtfully thoughtfully with with her her hand. hand. by by and and by by she she put put her her other other hand hand on on my my shoulder; shoulder; and and so so we we both both sat, sat, looking looking into into the the past, past, without without saying saying another another word, word, until until we we parted parted for for the the night. night. i i rode rode away, away, early early in in the the morning, morning, for for the the scene scene of of my my old old school-days. school-days. i i cannot cannot say say that that i i was was yet yet quite quite happy, happy, in in the the hope hope that that i i was was gaining gaining a a victory victory over over myself; myself; even even in in the the prospect prospect of of so so soon soon looking looking on on her her face face again. again. the the well-remembered well-remembered ground ground was was soon soon traversed, traversed, and and i i came came into into the the quiet quiet streets, streets, where where every every stone stone was was a a boy's boy's book book to to me. me. i i went went on on foot foot to to the the old old house, house, and and went went away away with with a a heart heart too too full full to to enter. enter. i i returned; returned; and and looking, looking, as as i i passed, passed, through through the the low low window window of of the the turret-room turret-room where where first first uriah uriah heep, heep, and and afterwards afterwards mr. mr. micawber, micawber, had had been been wont wont to to sit, sit, saw saw that that it it was was a a little little parlour parlour now, now, and and that that there there was was no no office. office. otherwise otherwise the the staid staid old old house house was, was, as as to to its its cleanliness cleanliness and and order, order, still still just just as as it it had had been been when when i i first first saw saw it. it. i i requested requested the the new new maid maid who who admitted admitted me, me, to to tell tell miss miss wickfield wickfield that that a a gentleman gentleman who who waited waited on on her her from from a a friend friend abroad, abroad, was was there; there; and and i i was was shown shown up up the the grave grave old old staircase staircase (cautioned (cautioned of of the the steps steps i i knew knew so so well), well), into into the the unchanged unchanged drawing-room. drawing-room. the the books books that that agnes agnes and and i i had had read read together, together, were were on on their their shelves; shelves; and and the the desk desk where where i i had had laboured laboured at at my my lessons, lessons, many many a a night, night, stood stood yet yet at at the the same same old old corner corner of of the the table. table. all all the the little little changes changes that that had had crept crept in in when when the the heeps heeps were were there, there, were were changed changed again. again. everything everything was was as as it it used used to to be, be, in in the the happy happy time. time. i i stood stood in in a a window, window, and and looked looked across across the the ancient ancient street street at at the the opposite opposite houses, houses, recalling recalling how how i i had had watched watched them them on on wet wet afternoons, afternoons, when when i i first first came came there; there; and and how how i i had had used used to to speculate speculate about about the the people people who who appeared appeared at at any any of of the the windows, windows, and and had had followed followed them them with with my my eyes eyes up up and and down down stairs, stairs, while while women women went went clicking clicking along along the the pavement pavement in in pattens, pattens, and and the the dull dull rain rain fell fell in in slanting slanting lines, lines, and and poured poured out out of of the the water-spout water-spout yonder, yonder, and and flowed flowed into into the the road. road. the the feeling feeling with with which which i i used used to to watch watch the the tramps, tramps, as as they they came came into into the the town town on on those those wet wet evenings, evenings, at at dusk, dusk, and and limped limped past, past, with with their their bundles bundles drooping drooping over over their their shoulders shoulders at at the the ends ends of of sticks, sticks, came came freshly freshly back back to to me; me; fraught, fraught, as as then, then, with with the the smell smell of of damp damp earth, earth, and and wet wet leaves leaves and and briar, briar, and and the the sensation sensation of of the the very very airs airs that that blew blew upon upon me me in in my my own own toilsome toilsome journey. journey. the the opening opening of of the the little little door door in in the the panelled panelled wall wall made made me me start start and and turn. turn. her her beautiful beautiful serene serene eyes eyes met met mine mine as as she she came came towards towards me. me. she she stopped stopped and and laid laid her her hand hand upon upon her her bosom, bosom, and and i i caught caught her her in in my my arms. arms. 'agnes! 'agnes! my my dear dear girl! girl! i i have have come come too too suddenly suddenly upon upon you.' 'no, 'no, no! no! i i am am so so rejoiced rejoiced to to see see you, trotwood!' trotwood!' 'dear 'dear agnes, agnes, the the happiness happiness it it is is to to me, me, to to see see you once once again!' again!' i i folded folded her her to to my my heart, heart, and, and, for for a a little little while, while, we we were were both both silent. silent. presently presently we we sat sat down, down, side side by by side; side; and and her her angel-face angel-face was was turned turned upon upon me me with with the the welcome welcome i i had had dreamed dreamed of, of, waking waking and and sleeping, sleeping, for for whole whole years. years. she she was was so so true, true, she she was was so so beautiful, beautiful, she she was was so so good, good, -- -- i i owed owed her her so so much much gratitude, gratitude, she she was was so so dear dear to to me, me, that that i i could could find find no no utterance utterance for for what what i i felt. felt. i i tried tried to to bless bless her, her, tried tried to to thank thank her, her, tried tried to to tell tell her her (as (as i i had had often often done done in in letters) letters) what what an an influence influence she she had had upon upon me; me; but but all all my my efforts efforts were were in in vain. vain. my my love love and and joy joy were were dumb. dumb. with with her her own own sweet sweet tranquillity, tranquillity, she she calmed calmed my my agitation; agitation; led led me me back back to to the the time time of of our our parting; parting; spoke spoke to to me me of of emily, emily, whom whom she she had had visited, visited, in in secret, secret, many many times; times; spoke spoke to to me me tenderly tenderly of of dora's dora's grave. grave. with with the the unerring unerring instinct instinct of of her her noble noble heart, heart, she she touched touched the the chords chords of of my my memory memory so so softly softly and and harmoniously, harmoniously, that that not not one one jarred jarred within within me; me; i i could could listen listen to to the the sorrowful, sorrowful, distant distant music, music, and and desire desire to to shrink shrink from from nothing nothing it it awoke. awoke. how how could could i, i, when, when, blended blended with with it it all, all, was was her her dear dear self, self, the the better better angel angel of of my my life? life? 'and 'and you, agnes,' agnes,' i i said, said, by by and and by. by. 'tell 'tell me me of of yourself. yourself. you have have hardly hardly ever ever told told me me of of your your own own life, life, in in all all this this lapse lapse of of time!' time!' 'what 'what should should i i tell?' tell?' she she answered, answered, with with her her radiant radiant smile. smile. 'papa 'papa is is well. well. you see see us us here, here, quiet quiet in in our our own own home; home; our our anxieties anxieties set set at at rest, rest, our our home home restored restored to to us; us; and and knowing knowing that, that, dear dear trotwood, trotwood, you know know all.' all.' 'all, 'all, agnes?' agnes?' said said i. i. she she looked looked at at me, me, with with some some fluttering fluttering wonder wonder in in her her face. face. 'is 'is there there nothing nothing else, else, sister?' sister?' i i said. said. her her colour, colour, which which had had just just now now faded, faded, returned, returned, and and faded faded again. again. she she smiled; smiled; with with a a quiet quiet sadness, sadness, i i thought; thought; and and shook shook her her head. head. i i had had sought sought to to lead lead her her to to what what my my aunt aunt had had hinted hinted at; at; for, for, sharply sharply painful painful to to me me as as it it must must be be to to receive receive that that confidence, confidence, i i was was to to discipline discipline my my heart, heart, and and do do my my duty duty to to her. her. i i saw, saw, however, however, that that she she was was uneasy, uneasy, and and i i let let it it pass. pass. 'you have have much much to to do, do, dear dear agnes?' agnes?' 'with 'with my my school?' school?' said said she, she, looking looking up up again, again, in in all all her her bright bright composure. composure. 'yes. 'yes. it it is is laborious, laborious, is is it it not?' not?' 'the 'the labour labour is is so so pleasant,' pleasant,' she she returned, returned, 'that 'that it it is is scarcely scarcely grateful grateful in in me me to to call call it it by by that that name.' name.' 'nothing 'nothing good good is is difficult difficult to to you,' said said i. i. her her colour colour came came and and went went once once more; more; and and once once more, more, as as she she bent bent her her head, head, i i saw saw the the same same sad sad smile. smile. 'you will will wait wait and and see see papa,' papa,' said said agnes, agnes, cheerfully, cheerfully, 'and 'and pass pass the the day day with with us? us? perhaps perhaps you will will sleep sleep in in your your own own room? room? we we always always call call it it yours.' yours.' i i could could not not do do that, that, having having promised promised to to ride ride back back to to my my aunt's aunt's at at night; night; but but i i would would pass pass the the day day there, there, joyfully. joyfully. 'i 'i must must be be a a prisoner prisoner for for a a little little while,' while,' said said agnes, agnes, 'but 'but here here are are the the old old books, books, trotwood, trotwood, and and the the old old music.' music.' 'even 'even the the old old flowers flowers are are here,' here,' said said i, i, looking looking round; round; 'or 'or the the old old kinds.' kinds.' 'i 'i have have found found a a pleasure,' pleasure,' returned returned agnes, agnes, smiling, smiling, 'while 'while you have have been been absent, absent, in in keeping keeping everything everything as as it it used used to to be be when when we we were were children. children. for for we we were were very very happy happy then, then, i i think.' think.' 'heaven 'heaven knows knows we we were!' were!' said said i. i. 'and 'and every every little little thing thing that that has has reminded reminded me me of of my my brother,' brother,' said said agnes, agnes, with with her her cordial cordial eyes eyes turned turned cheerfully cheerfully upon upon me, me, 'has 'has been been a a welcome welcome companion. companion. even even this,' this,' showing showing me me the the basket-trifle, basket-trifle, full full of of keys, keys, still still hanging hanging at at her her side, side, 'seems 'seems to to jingle jingle a a kind kind of of old old tune!' tune!' she she smiled smiled again, again, and and went went out out at at the the door door by by which which she she had had come. come. it it was was for for me me to to guard guard this this sisterly sisterly affection affection with with religious religious care. care. it it was was all all that that i i had had left left myself, myself, and and it it was was a a treasure. treasure. if if i i once once shook shook the the foundations foundations of of the the sacred sacred confidence confidence and and usage, usage, in in virtue virtue of of which which it it was was given given to to me, me, it it was was lost, lost, and and could could never never be be recovered. recovered. i i set set this this steadily steadily before before myself. myself. the the better better i i loved loved her, her, the the more more it it behoved behoved me me never never to to forget forget it. it. i i walked walked through through the the streets; streets; and, and, once once more more seeing seeing my my old old adversary adversary the the butcher butcher -- -- now now a a constable, constable, with with his his staff staff hanging hanging up up in in the the shop shop -- -- went went down down to to look look at at the the place place where where i i had had fought fought him; him; and and there there meditated meditated on on miss miss shepherd shepherd and and the the eldest eldest miss miss larkins, larkins, and and all all the the idle idle loves loves and and likings, likings, and and dislikings, dislikings, of of that that time. time. nothing nothing seemed seemed to to have have survived survived that that time time but but agnes; agnes; and and she, she, ever ever a a star star above above me, me, was was brighter brighter and and higher. higher. when when i i returned, returned, mr. mr. wickfield wickfield had had come come home, home, from from a a garden garden he he had, had, a a couple couple of of miles miles or or so so out out of of town, town, where where he he now now employed employed himself himself almost almost every every day. day. i i found found him him as as my my aunt aunt had had described described him. him. we we sat sat down down to to dinner, dinner, with with some some half-dozen half-dozen little little girls; girls; and and he he seemed seemed but but the the shadow shadow of of his his handsome handsome picture picture on on the the wall. wall. the the tranquillity tranquillity and and peace peace belonging, belonging, of of old, old, to to that that quiet quiet ground ground in in my my memory, memory, pervaded pervaded it it again. again. when when dinner dinner was was done, done, mr. mr. wickfield wickfield taking taking no no wine, wine, and and i i desiring desiring none, none, we we went went up-stairs; up-stairs; where where agnes agnes and and her her little little charges charges sang sang and and played, played, and and worked. worked. after after tea tea the the children children left left us; us; and and we we three three sat sat together, together, talking talking of of the the bygone bygone days. days. 'my 'my part part in in them,' them,' said said mr. mr. wickfield, wickfield, shaking shaking his his white white head, head, 'has 'has much much matter matter for for regret regret -- -- for for deep deep regret, regret, and and deep deep contrition, contrition, trotwood, trotwood, you well well know. know. but but i i would would not not cancel cancel it, it, if if it it were were in in my my power.' power.' i i could could readily readily believe believe that, that, looking looking at at the the face face beside beside him. him. 'i 'i should should cancel cancel with with it,' it,' he he pursued, pursued, 'such 'such patience patience and and devotion, devotion, such such fidelity, fidelity, such such a a child's child's love, love, as as i i must must not not forget, forget, no! no! even even to to forget forget myself.' myself.' 'i 'i understand understand you, sir,' sir,' i i softly softly said. said. 'i 'i hold hold it it -- -- i i have have always always held held it it -- -- in in veneration.' veneration.' 'but 'but no no one one knows, knows, not not even even you,' he he returned, returned, 'how 'how much much she she has has done, done, how how much much she she has has undergone, undergone, how how hard hard she she has has striven. striven. dear dear agnes!' agnes!' she she had had put put her her hand hand entreatingly entreatingly on on his his arm, arm, to to stop stop him; him; and and was was very, very, very very pale. pale. 'well, 'well, well!' well!' he he said said with with a a sigh, sigh, dismissing, dismissing, as as i i then then saw, saw, some some trial trial she she had had borne, borne, or or was was yet yet to to bear, bear, in in connexion connexion with with what what my my aunt aunt had had told told me. me. 'well! 'well! i i have have never never told told you, trotwood, trotwood, of of her her mother. mother. has has anyone?' anyone?' 'never, 'never, sir.' sir.' 'it's 'it's not not much much -- -- though though it it was was much much to to suffer. suffer. she she married married me me in in opposition opposition to to her her father's father's wish, wish, and and he he renounced renounced her. her. she she prayed prayed him him to to forgive forgive her, her, before before my my agnes agnes came came into into this this world. world. he he was was a a very very hard hard man, man, and and her her mother mother had had long long been been dead. dead. he he repulsed repulsed her. her. he he broke broke her her heart.' heart.' agnes agnes leaned leaned upon upon his his shoulder, shoulder, and and stole stole her her arm arm about about his his neck. neck. 'she 'she had had an an affectionate affectionate and and gentle gentle heart,' heart,' he he said; said; 'and 'and it it was was broken. broken. i i knew knew its its tender tender nature nature very very well. well. no no one one could, could, if if i i did did not. not. she she loved loved me me dearly, dearly, but but was was never never happy. happy. she she was was always always labouring, labouring, in in secret, secret, under under this this distress; distress; and and being being delicate delicate and and downcast downcast at at the the time time of of his his last last repulse repulse -- -- for for it it was was not not the the first, first, by by many many -- -- pined pined away away and and died. died. she she left left me me agnes, agnes, two two weeks weeks old; old; and and the the grey grey hair hair that that you recollect recollect me me with, with, when when you first first came.' came.' he he kissed kissed agnes agnes on on her her cheek. cheek. 'my 'my love love for for my my dear dear child child was was a a diseased diseased love, love, but but my my mind mind was was all all unhealthy unhealthy then. then. i i say say no no more more of of that. that. i i am am not not speaking speaking of of myself, myself, trotwood, trotwood, but but of of her her mother, mother, and and of of her. her. if if i i give give you any any clue clue to to what what i i am, am, or or to to what what i i have have been, been, you will will unravel unravel it, it, i i know. know. what what agnes agnes is, is, i i need need not not say. say. i i have have always always read read something something of of her her poor poor mother's mother's story, story, in in her her character; character; and and so so i i tell tell it it you tonight, tonight, when when we we three three are are again again together, together, after after such such great great changes. changes. i i have have told told it it all.' all.' his his bowed bowed head, head, and and her her angel-face angel-face and and filial filial duty, duty, derived derived a a more more pathetic pathetic meaning meaning from from it it than than they they had had had had before. before. if if i i had had wanted wanted anything anything by by which which to to mark mark this this night night of of our our re-union, re-union, i i should should have have found found it it in in this. this. agnes agnes rose rose up up from from her her father's father's side, side, before before long; long; and and going going softly softly to to her her piano, piano, played played some some of of the the old old airs airs to to which which we we had had often often listened listened in in that that place. place. 'have 'have you any any intention intention of of going going away away again?' again?' agnes agnes asked asked me, me, as as i i was was standing standing by. by. 'what 'what does does my my sister sister say say to to that?' that?' 'i 'i hope hope not.' not.' 'then 'then i i have have no no such such intention, intention, agnes.' agnes.' 'i 'i think think you ought ought not, not, trotwood, trotwood, since since you ask ask me,' me,' she she said, said, mildly. mildly. 'your 'your growing growing reputation reputation and and success success enlarge enlarge your your power power of of doing doing good; good; and and if if i i could could spare spare my my brother,' brother,' with with her her eyes eyes upon upon me, me, 'perhaps 'perhaps the the time time could could not.' not.' 'what 'what i i am, am, you have have made made me, me, agnes. agnes. you should should know know best.' best.' 'i 'i made made you, trotwood?' trotwood?' 'yes! 'yes! agnes, agnes, my my dear dear girl!' girl!' i i said, said, bending bending over over her. her. 'i 'i tried tried to to tell tell you, when when we we met met today, today, something something that that has has been been in in my my thoughts thoughts since since dora dora died. died. you remember, remember, when when you came came down down to to me me in in our our little little room room -- -- pointing pointing upward, upward, agnes?' agnes?' 'oh, 'oh, trotwood!' trotwood!' she she returned, returned, her her eyes eyes filled filled with with tears. tears. 'so 'so loving, loving, so so confiding, confiding, and and so so young! young! can can i i ever ever forget?' forget?' 'as 'as you were were then, then, my my sister, sister, i i have have often often thought thought since, since, you have have ever ever been been to to me. me. ever ever pointing pointing upward, upward, agnes; agnes; ever ever leading leading me me to to something something better; better; ever ever directing directing me me to to higher higher things!' things!' she she only only shook shook her her head; head; through through her her tears tears i i saw saw the the same same sad sad quiet quiet smile. smile. 'and 'and i i am am so so grateful grateful to to you for for it, it, agnes, agnes, so so bound bound to to you, that that there there is is no no name name for for the the affection affection of of my my heart. heart. i i want want you to to know, know, yet yet don't don't know know how how to to tell tell you, that that all all my my life life long long i i shall shall look look up up to to you, and and be be guided guided by by you, as as i i have have been been through through the the darkness darkness that that is is past. past. whatever whatever betides, betides, whatever whatever new new ties ties you may may form, form, whatever whatever changes changes may may come come between between us, us, i i shall shall always always look look to to you, and and love love you, as as i i do do now, now, and and have have always always done. done. you will will always always be be my my solace solace and and resource, resource, as as you have have always always been. been. until until i i die, die, my my dearest dearest sister, sister, i i shall shall see see you always always before before me, me, pointing pointing upward!' upward!' she she put put her her hand hand in in mine, mine, and and told told me me she she was was proud proud of of me, me, and and of of what what i i said; said; although although i i praised praised her her very very far far beyond beyond her her worth. worth. then then she she went went on on softly softly playing, playing, but but without without removing removing her her eyes eyes from from me. me. 'do 'do you know, know, what what i i have have heard heard tonight, tonight, agnes,' agnes,' said said i, i, strangely strangely seems seems to to be be a a part part of of the the feeling feeling with with which which i i regarded regarded you when when i i saw saw you first first -- -- with with which which i i sat sat beside beside you in in my my rough rough school-days?' school-days?' 'you knew knew i i had had no no mother,' mother,' she she replied replied with with a a smile, smile, 'and 'and felt felt kindly kindly towards towards me.' me.' 'more 'more than than that, that, agnes, agnes, i i knew, knew, almost almost as as if if i i had had known known this this story, story, that that there there was was something something inexplicably inexplicably gentle gentle and and softened, softened, surrounding surrounding you; something something that that might might have have been been sorrowful sorrowful in in someone someone else else (as (as i i can can now now understand understand it it was), was), but but was was not not so so in in you.' she she softly softly played played on, on, looking looking at at me me still. still. 'will 'will you laugh laugh at at my my cherishing cherishing such such fancies, fancies, agnes?' agnes?' 'no!' 'no!' 'or 'or at at my my saying saying that that i i really really believe believe i i felt, felt, even even then, then, that that you could could be be faithfully faithfully affectionate affectionate against against all all discouragement, discouragement, and and never never cease cease to to be be so, so, until until you ceased ceased to to live? live? -- -- -will -will you laugh laugh at at such such a a dream?' dream?' 'oh, 'oh, no! no! oh, oh, no!' no!' for for an an instant, instant, a a distressful distressful shadow shadow crossed crossed her her face; face; but, but, even even in in the the start start it it gave gave me, me, it it was was gone; gone; and and she she was was playing playing on, on, and and looking looking at at me me with with her her own own calm calm smile. smile. as as i i rode rode back back in in the the lonely lonely night, night, the the wind wind going going by by me me like like a a restless restless memory, memory, i i thought thought of of this, this, and and feared feared she she was was not not happy. happy. i i was was not not happy; happy; but, but, thus thus far, far, i i had had faithfully faithfully set set the the seal seal upon upon the the past, past, and, and, thinking thinking of of her, her, pointing pointing upward, upward, thought thought of of her her as as pointing pointing to to that that sky sky above above me, me, where, where, in in the the mystery mystery to to come, come, i i might might yet yet love love her her with with a a love love unknown unknown on on earth, earth, and and tell tell her her what what the the strife strife had had been been within within me me when when i i loved loved her her here. here. chapter chapter 61. 61. i i am am shown shown two two interesting interesting penitents penitents for for a a time time -- -- at at all all events events until until my my book book should should be be completed, completed, which which would would be be the the work work of of several several months months -- -- i i took took up up my my abode abode in in my my aunt's aunt's house house at at dover; dover; and and there, there, sitting sitting in in the the window window from from which which i i had had looked looked out out at at the the moon moon upon upon the the sea, sea, when when that that roof roof first first gave gave me me shelter, shelter, i i quietly quietly pursued pursued my my task. task. in in pursuance pursuance of of my my intention intention of of referring referring to to my my own own fictions fictions only only when when their their course course should should incidentally incidentally connect connect itself itself with with the the progress progress of of my my story, story, i i do do not not enter enter on on the the aspirations, aspirations, the the delights, delights, anxieties, anxieties, and and triumphs triumphs of of my my art. art. that that i i truly truly devoted devoted myself myself to to it it with with my my strongest strongest earnestness, earnestness, and and bestowed bestowed upon upon it it every every energy energy of of my my soul, soul, i i have have already already said. said. if if the the books books i i have have written written be be of of any any worth, worth, they they will will supply supply the the rest. rest. i i shall shall otherwise otherwise have have written written to to poor poor purpose, purpose, and and the the rest rest will will be be of of interest interest to to no no one. one. occasionally, occasionally, i i went went to to london; london; to to lose lose myself myself in in the the swarm swarm of of life life there, there, or or to to consult consult with with traddles traddles on on some some business business point. point. he he had had managed managed for for me, me, in in my my absence, absence, with with the the soundest soundest judgement; judgement; and and my my worldly worldly affairs affairs were were prospering. prospering. as as my my notoriety notoriety began began to to bring bring upon upon me me an an enormous enormous quantity quantity of of letters letters from from people people of of whom whom i i had had no no knowledge knowledge -- -- chiefly chiefly about about nothing, nothing, and and extremely extremely difficult difficult to to answer answer -- -- i i agreed agreed with with traddles traddles to to have have my my name name painted painted up up on on his his door. door. there, there, the the devoted devoted postman postman on on that that beat beat delivered delivered bushels bushels of of letters letters for for me; me; and and there, there, at at intervals, intervals, i i laboured laboured through through them, them, like like a a home home secretary secretary of of state state without without the the salary. salary. among among this this correspondence, correspondence, there there dropped dropped in, in, every every now now and and then, then, an an obliging obliging proposal proposal from from one one of of the the numerous numerous outsiders outsiders always always lurking lurking about about the the commons, commons, to to practise practise under under cover cover of of my my name name (if (if i i would would take take the the necessary necessary steps steps remaining remaining to to make make a a proctor proctor of of myself), myself), and and pay pay me me a a percentage percentage on on the the profits. profits. but but i i declined declined these these offers; offers; being being already already aware aware that that there there were were plenty plenty of of such such covert covert practitioners practitioners in in existence, existence, and and considering considering the the commons commons quite quite bad bad enough, enough, without without my my doing doing anything anything to to make make it it worse. worse. the the girls girls had had gone gone home, home, when when my my name name burst burst into into bloom bloom on on traddles's traddles's door; door; and and the the sharp sharp boy boy looked, looked, all all day, day, as as if if he he had had never never heard heard of of sophy, sophy, shut shut up up in in a a back back room, room, glancing glancing down down from from her her work work into into a a sooty sooty little little strip strip of of garden garden with with a a pump pump in in it. it. but but there there i i always always found found her, her, the the same same bright bright housewife; housewife; often often humming humming her her devonshire devonshire ballads ballads when when no no strange strange foot foot was was coming coming up up the the stairs, stairs, and and blunting blunting the the sharp sharp boy boy in in his his official official closet closet with with melody. melody. i i wondered, wondered, at at first, first, why why i i so so often often found found sophy sophy writing writing in in a a copy-book; copy-book; and and why why she she always always shut shut it it up up when when i i appeared, appeared, and and hurried hurried it it into into the the table-drawer. table-drawer. but but the the secret secret soon soon came came out. out. one one day, day, traddles traddles (who (who had had just just come come home home through through the the drizzling drizzling sleet sleet from from court) court) took took a a paper paper out out of of his his desk, desk, and and asked asked me me what what i i thought thought of of that that handwriting? handwriting? 'oh, 'oh, don't, don't, tom!' tom!' cried cried sophy, sophy, who who was was warming warming his his slippers slippers before before the the fire. fire. 'my 'my dear,' dear,' returned returned tom, tom, in in a a delighted delighted state, state, 'why 'why not? not? what what do do you say say to to that that writing, writing, copperfield?' copperfield?' 'it's 'it's extraordinarily extraordinarily legal legal and and formal,' formal,' said said i. i. 'i 'i don't don't think think i i ever ever saw saw such such a a stiff stiff hand.' hand.' 'not 'not like like a a lady's lady's hand, hand, is is it?' it?' said said traddles. traddles. 'a 'a lady's!' lady's!' i i repeated. repeated. 'bricks 'bricks and and mortar mortar are are more more like like a a lady's lady's hand!' hand!' traddles traddles broke broke into into a a rapturous rapturous laugh, laugh, and and informed informed me me that that it it was was sophy's sophy's writing; writing; that that sophy sophy had had vowed vowed and and declared declared he he would would need need a a copying-clerk copying-clerk soon, soon, and and she she would would be be that that clerk; clerk; that that she she had had acquired acquired this this hand hand from from a a pattern; pattern; and and that that she she could could throw throw off off -- -- i i forget forget how how many many folios folios an an hour. hour. sophy sophy was was very very much much confused confused by by my my being being told told all all this, this, and and said said that that when when 'tom' 'tom' was was made made a a judge judge he he wouldn't wouldn't be be so so ready ready to to proclaim proclaim it. it. which which 'tom' 'tom' denied; denied; averring averring that that he he should should always always be be equally equally proud proud of of it, it, under under all all circumstances. circumstances. 'what 'what a a thoroughly thoroughly good good and and charming charming wife wife she she is, is, my my dear dear traddles!' traddles!' said said i, i, when when she she had had gone gone away, away, laughing. laughing. 'my 'my dear dear copperfield,' copperfield,' returned returned traddles, traddles, 'she 'she is, is, without without any any exception, exception, the the dearest dearest girl! girl! the the way way she she manages manages this this place; place; her her punctuality, punctuality, domestic domestic knowledge, knowledge, economy, economy, and and order; order; her her cheerfulness, cheerfulness, copperfield!' copperfield!' 'indeed, 'indeed, you have have reason reason to to commend commend her!' her!' i i returned. returned. 'you are are a a happy happy fellow. fellow. i i believe believe you make make yourselves, yourselves, and and each each other, other, two two of of the the happiest happiest people people in in the the world.' world.' 'i 'i am am sure sure we we are are two two of of the the happiest happiest people,' people,' returned returned traddles. traddles. 'i 'i admit admit that, that, at at all all events. events. bless bless my my soul, soul, when when i i see see her her getting getting up up by by candle-light candle-light on on these these dark dark mornings, mornings, busying busying herself herself in in the the day's day's arrangements, arrangements, going going out out to to market market before before the the clerks clerks come come into into the the inn, inn, caring caring for for no no weather, weather, devising devising the the most most capital capital little little dinners dinners out out of of the the plainest plainest materials, materials, making making puddings puddings and and pies, pies, keeping keeping everything everything in in its its right right place, place, always always so so neat neat and and ornamental ornamental herself, herself, sitting sitting up up at at night night with with me me if if it's it's ever ever so so late, late, sweet-tempered sweet-tempered and and encouraging encouraging always, always, and and all all for for me, me, i i positively positively sometimes sometimes can't can't believe believe it, it, copperfield!' copperfield!' he he was was tender tender of of the the very very slippers slippers she she had had been been warming, warming, as as he he put put them them on, on, and and stretched stretched his his feet feet enjoyingly enjoyingly upon upon the the fender. fender. 'i 'i positively positively sometimes sometimes can't can't believe believe it,' it,' said said traddles. traddles. 'then 'then our our pleasures! pleasures! dear dear me, me, they they are are inexpensive, inexpensive, but but they they are are quite quite wonderful! wonderful! when when we we are are at at home home here, here, of of an an evening, evening, and and shut shut the the outer outer door, door, and and draw draw those those curtains curtains -- -- which which she she made made -- -- where where could could we we be be more more snug? snug? when when it's it's fine, fine, and and we we go go out out for for a a walk walk in in the the evening, evening, the the streets streets abound abound in in enjoyment enjoyment for for us. us. we we look look into into the the glittering glittering windows windows of of the the jewellers' jewellers' shops; shops; and and i i show show sophy sophy which which of of the the diamond-eyed diamond-eyed serpents, serpents, coiled coiled up up on on white white satin satin rising rising grounds, grounds, i i would would give give her her if if i i could could afford afford it; it; and and sophy sophy shows shows me me which which of of the the gold gold watches watches that that are are capped capped and and jewelled jewelled and and engine-turned, engine-turned, and and possessed possessed of of the the horizontal horizontal lever-escape-movement, lever-escape-movement, and and all all sorts sorts of of things, things, she she would would buy buy for for me me if if she she could could afford afford it; it; and and we we pick pick out out the the spoons spoons and and forks, forks, fish-slices, fish-slices, butter-knives, butter-knives, and and sugar-tongs, sugar-tongs, we we should should both both prefer prefer if if we we could could both both afford afford it; it; and and really really we we go go away away as as if if we we had had got got them! them! then, then, when when we we stroll stroll into into the the squares, squares, and and great great streets, streets, and and see see a a house house to to let, let, sometimes sometimes we we look look up up at at it, it, and and say, say, how how would would that that do, do, if if i i was was made made a a judge? judge? and and we we parcel parcel it it out out -- -- such such a a room room for for us, us, such such rooms rooms for for the the girls, girls, and and so so forth; forth; until until we we settle settle to to our our satisfaction satisfaction that that it it would would do, do, or or it it wouldn't wouldn't do, do, as as the the case case may may be. be. sometimes, sometimes, we we go go at at half-price half-price to to the the pit pit of of the the theatre theatre -- -- the the very very smell smell of of which which is is cheap, cheap, in in my my opinion, opinion, at at the the money money -- -- and and there there we we thoroughly thoroughly enjoy enjoy the the play: play: which which sophy sophy believes believes every every word word of, of, and and so so do do i. i. in in walking walking home, home, perhaps perhaps we we buy buy a a little little bit bit of of something something at at a a cook's-shop, cook's-shop, or or a a little little lobster lobster at at the the fishmongers, fishmongers, and and bring bring it it here, here, and and make make a a splendid splendid supper, supper, chatting chatting about about what what we we have have seen. seen. now, now, you know, know, copperfield, copperfield, if if i i was was lord lord chancellor, chancellor, we we couldn't couldn't do do this!' this!' 'you would would do do something, something, whatever whatever you were, were, my my dear dear traddles,' traddles,' thought thought i, i, 'that 'that would would be be pleasant pleasant and and amiable. amiable. and and by by the the way,' way,' i i said said aloud, aloud, 'i 'i suppose suppose you never never draw draw any any skeletons skeletons now?' now?' 'really,' 'really,' replied replied traddles, traddles, laughing, laughing, and and reddening, reddening, 'i 'i can't can't wholly wholly deny deny that that i i do, do, my my dear dear copperfield. copperfield. for for being being in in one one of of the the back back rows rows of of the the king's king's bench bench the the other other day, day, with with a a pen pen in in my my hand, hand, the the fancy fancy came came into into my my head head to to try try how how i i had had preserved preserved that that accomplishment. accomplishment. and and i i am am afraid afraid there's there's a a skeleton skeleton -- -- in in a a wig wig -- -- on on the the ledge ledge of of the the desk.' desk.' after after we we had had both both laughed laughed heartily, heartily, traddles traddles wound wound up up by by looking looking with with a a smile smile at at the the fire, fire, and and saying, saying, in in his his forgiving forgiving way, way, 'old 'old creakle!' creakle!' 'i 'i have have a a letter letter from from that that old old -- -- rascal rascal here,' here,' said said i. i. for for i i never never was was less less disposed disposed to to forgive forgive him him the the way way he he used used to to batter batter traddles, traddles, than than when when i i saw saw traddles traddles so so ready ready to to forgive forgive him him himself. himself. 'from 'from creakle creakle the the schoolmaster?' schoolmaster?' exclaimed exclaimed traddles. traddles. 'no!' 'no!' 'among 'among the the persons persons who who are are attracted attracted to to me me in in my my rising rising fame fame and and fortune,' fortune,' said said i, i, looking looking over over my my letters, letters, 'and 'and who who discover discover that that they they were were always always much much attached attached to to me, me, is is the the self-same self-same creakle. creakle. he he is is not not a a schoolmaster schoolmaster now, now, traddles. traddles. he he is is retired. retired. he he is is a a middlesex middlesex magistrate.' magistrate.' i i thought thought traddles traddles might might be be surprised surprised to to hear hear it, it, but but he he was was not not so so at at all. all. 'how 'how do do you suppose suppose he he comes comes to to be be a a middlesex middlesex magistrate?' magistrate?' said said i. i. 'oh 'oh dear dear me!' me!' replied replied traddles, traddles, 'it 'it would would be be very very difficult difficult to to answer answer that that question. question. perhaps perhaps he he voted voted for for somebody, somebody, or or lent lent money money to to somebody, somebody, or or bought bought something something of of somebody, somebody, or or otherwise otherwise obliged obliged somebody, somebody, or or jobbed jobbed for for somebody, somebody, who who knew knew somebody somebody who who got got the the lieutenant lieutenant of of the the county county to to nominate nominate him him for for the the commission.' commission.' 'on 'on the the commission commission he he is, is, at at any any rate,' rate,' said said i. i. 'and 'and he he writes writes to to me me here, here, that that he he will will be be glad glad to to show show me, me, in in operation, operation, the the only only true true system system of of prison prison discipline; discipline; the the only only unchallengeable unchallengeable way way of of making making sincere sincere and and lasting lasting converts converts and and penitents penitents -- -- which, which, you know, know, is is by by solitary solitary confinement. confinement. what what do do you say?' say?' 'to 'to the the system?' system?' inquired inquired traddles, traddles, looking looking grave. grave. 'no. 'no. to to my my accepting accepting the the offer, offer, and and your your going going with with me?' me?' 'i 'i don't don't object,' object,' said said traddles. traddles. 'then 'then i'll i'll write write to to say say so. so. you remember remember (to (to say say nothing nothing of of our our treatment) treatment) this this same same creakle creakle turning turning his his son son out out of of doors, doors, i i suppose, suppose, and and the the life life he he used used to to lead lead his his wife wife and and daughter?' daughter?' 'perfectly,' 'perfectly,' said said traddles. traddles. 'yet, 'yet, if if you'll you'll read read his his letter, letter, you'll you'll find find he he is is the the tenderest tenderest of of men men to to prisoners prisoners convicted convicted of of the the whole whole calendar calendar of of felonies,' felonies,' said said i; i; 'though 'though i i can't can't find find that that his his tenderness tenderness extends extends to to any any other other class class of of created created beings.' beings.' traddles traddles shrugged shrugged his his shoulders, shoulders, and and was was not not at at all all surprised. surprised. i i had had not not expected expected him him to to be, be, and and was was not not surprised surprised myself; myself; or or my my observation observation of of similar similar practical practical satires satires would would have have been been but but scanty. scanty. we we arranged arranged the the time time of of our our visit, visit, and and i i wrote wrote accordingly accordingly to to mr. mr. creakle creakle that that evening. evening. on on the the appointed appointed day day -- -- i i think think it it was was the the next next day, day, but but no no matter matter -- -- traddles traddles and and i i repaired repaired to to the the prison prison where where mr. mr. creakle creakle was was powerful. powerful. it it was was an an immense immense and and solid solid building, building, erected erected at at a a vast vast expense. expense. i i could could not not help help thinking, thinking, as as we we approached approached the the gate, gate, what what an an uproar uproar would would have have been been made made in in the the country, country, if if any any deluded deluded man man had had proposed proposed to to spend spend one one half half the the money money it it had had cost, cost, on on the the erection erection of of an an industrial industrial school school for for the the young, young, or or a a house house of of refuge refuge for for the the deserving deserving old. old. in in an an office office that that might might have have been been on on the the ground-floor ground-floor of of the the tower tower of of babel, babel, it it was was so so massively massively constructed, constructed, we we were were presented presented to to our our old old schoolmaster; schoolmaster; who who was was one one of of a a group, group, composed composed of of two two or or three three of of the the busier busier sort sort of of magistrates, magistrates, and and some some visitors visitors they they had had brought. brought. he he received received me, me, like like a a man man who who had had formed formed my my mind mind in in bygone bygone years, years, and and had had always always loved loved me me tenderly. tenderly. on on my my introducing introducing traddles, traddles, mr. mr. creakle creakle expressed, expressed, in in like like manner, manner, but but in in an an inferior inferior degree, degree, that that he he had had always always been been traddles's traddles's guide, guide, philosopher, philosopher, and and friend. friend. our our venerable venerable instructor instructor was was a a great great deal deal older, older, and and not not improved improved in in appearance. appearance. his his face face was was as as fiery fiery as as ever; ever; his his eyes eyes were were as as small, small, and and rather rather deeper deeper set. set. the the scanty, scanty, wet-looking wet-looking grey grey hair, hair, by by which which i i remembered remembered him, him, was was almost almost gone; gone; and and the the thick thick veins veins in in his his bald bald head head were were none none the the more more agreeable agreeable to to look look at. at. after after some some conversation conversation among among these these gentlemen, gentlemen, from from which which i i might might have have supposed supposed that that there there was was nothing nothing in in the the world world to to be be legitimately legitimately taken taken into into account account but but the the supreme supreme comfort comfort of of prisoners, prisoners, at at any any expense, expense, and and nothing nothing on on the the wide wide earth earth to to be be done done outside outside prison-doors, prison-doors, we we began began our our inspection. inspection. it it being being then then just just dinner-time, dinner-time, we we went, went, first first into into the the great great kitchen, kitchen, where where every every prisoner's prisoner's dinner dinner was was in in course course of of being being set set out out separately separately (to (to be be handed handed to to him him in in his his cell), cell), with with the the regularity regularity and and precision precision of of clock-work. clock-work. i i said said aside, aside, to to traddles, traddles, that that i i wondered wondered whether whether it it occurred occurred to to anybody, anybody, that that there there was was a a striking striking contrast contrast between between these these plentiful plentiful repasts repasts of of choice choice quality, quality, and and the the dinners, dinners, not not to to say say of of paupers, paupers, but but of of soldiers, soldiers, sailors, sailors, labourers, labourers, the the great great bulk bulk of of the the honest, honest, working working community; community; of of whom whom not not one one man man in in five five hundred hundred ever ever dined dined half half so so well. well. but but i i learned learned that that the the 'system' 'system' required required high high living; living; and, and, in in short, short, to to dispose dispose of of the the system, system, once once for for all, all, i i found found that that on on that that head head and and on on all all others, others, 'the 'the system' system' put put an an end end to to all all doubts, doubts, and and disposed disposed of of all all anomalies. anomalies. nobody nobody appeared appeared to to have have the the least least idea idea that that there there was was any any other other system, system, but but the the system, system, to to be be considered. considered. as as we we were were going going through through some some of of the the magnificent magnificent passages, passages, i i inquired inquired of of mr. mr. creakle creakle and and his his friends friends what what were were supposed supposed to to be be the the main main advantages advantages of of this this all-governing all-governing and and universally universally over-riding over-riding system? system? i i found found them them to to be be the the perfect perfect isolation isolation of of prisoners prisoners -- -- so so that that no no one one man man in in confinement confinement there, there, knew knew anything anything about about another; another; and and the the reduction reduction of of prisoners prisoners to to a a wholesome wholesome state state of of mind, mind, leading leading to to sincere sincere contrition contrition and and repentance. repentance. now, now, it it struck struck me, me, when when we we began began to to visit visit individuals individuals in in their their cells, cells, and and to to traverse traverse the the passages passages in in which which those those cells cells were, were, and and to to have have the the manner manner of of the the going going to to chapel chapel and and so so forth, forth, explained explained to to us, us, that that there there was was a a strong strong probability probability of of the the prisoners prisoners knowing knowing a a good good deal deal about about each each other, other, and and of of their their carrying carrying on on a a pretty pretty complete complete system system of of intercourse. intercourse. this, this, at at the the time time i i write, write, has has been been proved, proved, i i believe, believe, to to be be the the case; case; but, but, as as it it would would have have been been flat flat blasphemy blasphemy against against the the system system to to have have hinted hinted such such a a doubt doubt then, then, i i looked looked out out for for the the penitence penitence as as diligently diligently as as i i could. could. and and here here again, again, i i had had great great misgivings. misgivings. i i found found as as prevalent prevalent a a fashion fashion in in the the form form of of the the penitence, penitence, as as i i had had left left outside outside in in the the forms forms of of the the coats coats and and waistcoats waistcoats in in the the windows windows of of the the tailors' tailors' shops. shops. i i found found a a vast vast amount amount of of profession, profession, varying varying very very little little in in character: character: varying varying very very little little (which (which i i thought thought exceedingly exceedingly suspicious), suspicious), even even in in words. words. i i found found a a great great many many foxes, foxes, disparaging disparaging whole whole vineyards vineyards of of inaccessible inaccessible grapes; grapes; but but i i found found very very few few foxes foxes whom whom i i would would have have trusted trusted within within reach reach of of a a bunch. bunch. above above all, all, i i found found that that the the most most professing professing men men were were the the greatest greatest objects objects of of interest; interest; and and that that their their conceit, conceit, their their vanity, vanity, their their want want of of excitement, excitement, and and their their love love of of deception deception (which (which many many of of them them possessed possessed to to an an almost almost incredible incredible extent, extent, as as their their histories histories showed), showed), all all prompted prompted to to these these professions, professions, and and were were all all gratified gratified by by them. them. however, however, i i heard heard so so repeatedly, repeatedly, in in the the course course of of our our goings goings to to and and fro, fro, of of a a certain certain number number twenty twenty seven, seven, who who was was the the favourite, favourite, and and who who really really appeared appeared to to be be a a model model prisoner, prisoner, that that i i resolved resolved to to suspend suspend my my judgement judgement until until i i should should see see twenty twenty seven. seven. twenty twenty eight, eight, i i understood, understood, was was also also a a bright bright particular particular star; star; but but it it was was his his misfortune misfortune to to have have his his glory glory a a little little dimmed dimmed by by the the extraordinary extraordinary lustre lustre of of twenty twenty seven. seven. i i heard heard so so much much of of twenty twenty seven, seven, of of his his pious pious admonitions admonitions to to everybody everybody around around him, him, and and of of the the beautiful beautiful letters letters he he constantly constantly wrote wrote to to his his mother mother (whom (whom he he seemed seemed to to consider consider in in a a very very bad bad way), way), that that i i became became quite quite impatient impatient to to see see him. him. i i had had to to restrain restrain my my impatience impatience for for some some time, time, on on account account of of twenty twenty seven seven being being reserved reserved for for a a concluding concluding effect. effect. but, but, at at last, last, we we came came to to the the door door of of his his cell; cell; and and mr. mr. creakle, creakle, looking looking through through a a little little hole hole in in it, it, reported reported to to us, us, in in a a state state of of the the greatest greatest admiration, admiration, that that he he was was reading reading a a hymn hymn book. book. there there was was such such a a rush rush of of heads heads immediately, immediately, to to see see number number twenty twenty seven seven reading reading his his hymn hymn book, book, that that the the little little hole hole was was blocked blocked up, up, six six or or seven seven heads heads deep. deep. to to remedy remedy this this inconvenience, inconvenience, and and give give us us an an opportunity opportunity of of conversing conversing with with twenty twenty seven seven in in all all his his purity, purity, mr. mr. creakle creakle directed directed the the door door of of the the cell cell to to be be unlocked, unlocked, and and twenty twenty seven seven to to be be invited invited out out into into the the passage. passage. this this was was done; done; and and whom whom should should traddles traddles and and i i then then behold, behold, to to our our amazement, amazement, in in this this converted converted number number twenty twenty seven, seven, but but uriah uriah heep! heep! he he knew knew us us directly; directly; and and said, said, as as he he came came out out -- -- with with the the old old writhe, writhe, -- -- 'how 'how do do you do, do, mr. mr. copperfield? copperfield? how how do do you do, do, mr. mr. traddles?' traddles?' this this recognition recognition caused caused a a general general admiration admiration in in the the party. party. i i rather rather thought thought that that everyone everyone was was struck struck by by his his not not being being proud, proud, and and taking taking notice notice of of us. us. 'well, 'well, twenty twenty seven,' seven,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, mournfully mournfully admiring admiring him. him. 'how 'how do do you find find yourself yourself today?' today?' 'i 'i am am very very umble, umble, sir!' sir!' replied replied uriah uriah heep. heep. 'you are are always always so, so, twenty twenty seven,' seven,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. here, here, another another gentleman gentleman asked, asked, with with extreme extreme anxiety: anxiety: 'are 'are you quite quite comfortable?' comfortable?' 'yes, 'yes, i i thank thank you, sir!' sir!' said said uriah uriah heep, heep, looking looking in in that that direction. direction. 'far 'far more more comfortable comfortable here, here, than than ever ever i i was was outside. outside. i i see see my my follies, follies, now, now, sir. sir. that's that's what what makes makes me me comfortable.' comfortable.' several several gentlemen gentlemen were were much much affected; affected; and and a a third third questioner, questioner, forcing forcing himself himself to to the the front, front, inquired inquired with with extreme extreme feeling: feeling: 'how 'how do do you find find the the beef?' beef?' 'thank 'thank you, sir,' sir,' replied replied uriah, uriah, glancing glancing in in the the new new direction direction of of this this voice, voice, 'it 'it was was tougher tougher yesterday yesterday than than i i could could wish; wish; but but it's it's my my duty duty to to bear. bear. i i have have committed committed follies, follies, gentlemen,' gentlemen,' said said uriah, uriah, looking looking round round with with a a meek meek smile, smile, 'and 'and i i ought ought to to bear bear the the consequences consequences without without repining.' repining.' a a murmur, murmur, partly partly of of gratification gratification at at twenty twenty seven's seven's celestial celestial state state of of mind, mind, and and partly partly of of indignation indignation against against the the contractor contractor who who had had given given him him any any cause cause of of complaint complaint (a (a note note of of which which was was immediately immediately made made by by mr. mr. creakle), creakle), having having subsided, subsided, twenty twenty seven seven stood stood in in the the midst midst of of us, us, as as if if he he felt felt himself himself the the principal principal object object of of merit merit in in a a highly highly meritorious meritorious museum. museum. that that we, we, the the neophytes, neophytes, might might have have an an excess excess of of light light shining shining upon upon us us all all at at once, once, orders orders were were given given to to let let out out twenty twenty eight. eight. i i had had been been so so much much astonished astonished already, already, that that i i only only felt felt a a kind kind of of resigned resigned wonder wonder when when mr. mr. littimer littimer walked walked forth, forth, reading reading a a good good book! book! 'twenty 'twenty eight,' eight,' said said a a gentleman gentleman in in spectacles, spectacles, who who had had not not yet yet spoken, spoken, 'you complained complained last last week, week, my my good good fellow, fellow, of of the the cocoa. cocoa. how how has has it it been been since?' since?' 'i 'i thank thank you, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. littimer, littimer, 'it 'it has has been been better better made. made. if if i i might might take take the the liberty liberty of of saying saying so, so, sir, sir, i i don't don't think think the the milk milk which which is is boiled boiled with with it it is is quite quite genuine; genuine; but but i i am am aware, aware, sir, sir, that that there there is is a a great great adulteration adulteration of of milk, milk, in in london, london, and and that that the the article article in in a a pure pure state state is is difficult difficult to to be be obtained.' obtained.' it it appeared appeared to to me me that that the the gentleman gentleman in in spectacles spectacles backed backed his his twenty twenty eight eight against against mr. mr. creakle's creakle's twenty twenty seven, seven, for for each each of of them them took took his his own own man man in in hand. hand. 'what 'what is is your your state state of of mind, mind, twenty twenty eight?' eight?' said said the the questioner questioner in in spectacles. spectacles. 'i 'i thank thank you, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. littimer; littimer; 'i 'i see see my my follies follies now, now, sir. sir. i i am am a a good good deal deal troubled troubled when when i i think think of of the the sins sins of of my my former former companions, companions, sir; sir; but but i i trust trust they they may may find find forgiveness.' forgiveness.' 'you are are quite quite happy happy yourself?' yourself?' said said the the questioner, questioner, nodding nodding encouragement. encouragement. 'i 'i am am much much obliged obliged to to you, sir,' sir,' returned returned mr. mr. littimer. littimer. 'perfectly 'perfectly so.' so.' 'is 'is there there anything anything at at all all on on your your mind mind now?' now?' said said the the questioner. questioner. 'if 'if so, so, mention mention it, it, twenty twenty eight.' eight.' 'sir,' 'sir,' said said mr. mr. littimer, littimer, without without looking looking up, up, 'if 'if my my eyes eyes have have not not deceived deceived me, me, there there is is a a gentleman gentleman present present who who was was acquainted acquainted with with me me in in my my former former life. life. it it may may be be profitable profitable to to that that gentleman gentleman to to know, know, sir, sir, that that i i attribute attribute my my past past follies, follies, entirely entirely to to having having lived lived a a thoughtless thoughtless life life in in the the service service of of young young men; men; and and to to having having allowed allowed myself myself to to be be led led by by them them into into weaknesses, weaknesses, which which i i had had not not the the strength strength to to resist. resist. i i hope hope that that gentleman gentleman will will take take warning, warning, sir, sir, and and will will not not be be offended offended at at my my freedom. freedom. it it is is for for his his good. good. i i am am conscious conscious of of my my own own past past follies. follies. i i hope hope he he may may repent repent of of all all the the wickedness wickedness and and sin sin to to which which he he has has been been a a party.' party.' i i observed observed that that several several gentlemen gentlemen were were shading shading their their eyes, eyes, each each with with one one hand, hand, as as if if they they had had just just come come into into church. church. 'this 'this does does you credit, credit, twenty twenty eight,' eight,' returned returned the the questioner. questioner. 'i 'i should should have have expected expected it it of of you. is is there there anything anything else?' else?' 'sir,' 'sir,' returned returned mr. mr. littimer, littimer, slightly slightly lifting lifting up up his his eyebrows, eyebrows, but but not not his his eyes, eyes, 'there 'there was was a a young young woman woman who who fell fell into into dissolute dissolute courses, courses, that that i i endeavoured endeavoured to to save, save, sir, sir, but but could could not not rescue. rescue. i i beg beg that that gentleman, gentleman, if if he he has has it it in in his his power, power, to to inform inform that that young young woman woman from from me me that that i i forgive forgive her her her her bad bad conduct conduct towards towards myself, myself, and and that that i i call call her her to to repentance repentance -- -- if if he he will will be be so so good.' good.' 'i 'i have have no no doubt, doubt, twenty twenty eight,' eight,' returned returned the the questioner, questioner, 'that 'that the the gentleman gentleman you refer refer to to feels feels very very strongly strongly -- -- as as we we all all must must -- -- what what you have have so so properly properly said. said. we we will will not not detain detain you.' 'i 'i thank thank you, sir,' sir,' said said mr. mr. littimer. littimer. 'gentlemen, 'gentlemen, i i wish wish you a a good good day, day, and and hoping hoping you and and your your families families will will also also see see your your wickedness, wickedness, and and amend!' amend!' with with this, this, number number twenty twenty eight eight retired, retired, after after a a glance glance between between him him and and uriah; uriah; as as if if they they were were not not altogether altogether unknown unknown to to each each other, other, through through some some medium medium of of communication; communication; and and a a murmur murmur went went round round the the group, group, as as his his door door shut shut upon upon him, him, that that he he was was a a most most respectable respectable man, man, and and a a beautiful beautiful case. case. 'now, 'now, twenty twenty seven,' seven,' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, entering entering on on a a clear clear stage stage with with his his man, man, 'is 'is there there anything anything that that anyone anyone can can do do for for you? if if so, so, mention mention it.' it.' 'i 'i would would umbly umbly ask, ask, sir,' sir,' returned returned uriah, uriah, with with a a jerk jerk of of his his malevolent malevolent head, head, 'for 'for leave leave to to write write again again to to mother.' mother.' 'it 'it shall shall certainly certainly be be granted,' granted,' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'thank 'thank you, sir! sir! i i am am anxious anxious about about mother. mother. i i am am afraid afraid she she ain't ain't safe.' safe.' somebody somebody incautiously incautiously asked, asked, what what from? from? but but there there was was a a scandalized scandalized whisper whisper of of 'hush!' 'hush!' 'immortally 'immortally safe, safe, sir,' sir,' returned returned uriah, uriah, writhing writhing in in the the direction direction of of the the voice. voice. 'i 'i should should wish wish mother mother to to be be got got into into my my state. state. i i never never should should have have been been got got into into my my present present state state if if i i hadn't hadn't come come here. here. i i wish wish mother mother had had come come here. here. it it would would be be better better for for everybody, everybody, if if they they got got took took up, up, and and was was brought brought here.' here.' this this sentiment sentiment gave gave unbounded unbounded satisfaction satisfaction -- -- greater greater satisfaction, satisfaction, i i think, think, than than anything anything that that had had passed passed yet. yet. 'before 'before i i come come here,' here,' said said uriah, uriah, stealing stealing a a look look at at us, us, as as if if he he would would have have blighted blighted the the outer outer world world to to which which we we belonged, belonged, if if he he could, could, 'i 'i was was given given to to follies; follies; but but now now i i am am sensible sensible of of my my follies. follies. there's there's a a deal deal of of sin sin outside. outside. there's there's a a deal deal of of sin sin in in mother. mother. there's there's nothing nothing but but sin sin everywhere everywhere -- -- except except here.' here.' 'you are are quite quite changed?' changed?' said said mr. mr. creakle. creakle. 'oh 'oh dear, dear, yes, yes, sir!' sir!' cried cried this this hopeful hopeful penitent. penitent. 'you wouldn't wouldn't relapse, relapse, if if you were were going going out?' out?' asked asked somebody somebody else. else. 'oh 'oh de-ar de-ar no, no, sir!' sir!' 'well!' 'well!' said said mr. mr. creakle, creakle, 'this 'this is is very very gratifying. gratifying. you have have addressed addressed mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, twenty twenty seven. seven. do do you wish wish to to say say anything anything further further to to him?' him?' 'you knew knew me, me, a a long long time time before before i i came came here here and and was was changed, changed, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, looking looking at at me; me; and and a a more more villainous villainous look look i i never never saw, saw, even even on on his his visage. visage. 'you knew knew me me when, when, in in spite spite of of my my follies, follies, i i was was umble umble among among them them that that was was proud, proud, and and meek meek among among them them that that was was violent violent -- -- you was was violent violent to to me me yourself, yourself, mr. mr. copperfield. copperfield. once, once, you struck struck me me a a blow blow in in the the face, face, you know.' know.' general general commiseration. commiseration. several several indignant indignant glances glances directed directed at at me. me. 'but 'but i i forgive forgive you, mr. mr. copperfield,' copperfield,' said said uriah, uriah, making making his his forgiving forgiving nature nature the the subject subject of of a a most most impious impious and and awful awful parallel, parallel, which which i i shall shall not not record. record. 'i 'i forgive forgive everybody. everybody. it it would would ill ill become become me me to to bear bear malice. malice. i i freely freely forgive forgive you, and and i i hope hope you'll you'll curb curb your your passions passions in in future. future. i i hope hope mr. mr. w. w. will will repent, repent, and and miss miss w., w., and and all all of of that that sinful sinful lot. lot. you've you've been been visited visited with with affliction, affliction, and and i i hope hope it it may may do do you good; good; but but you'd you'd better better have have come come here. here. mr. mr. w. w. had had better better have have come come here, here, and and miss miss w. w. too. too. the the best best wish wish i i could could give give you, mr. mr. copperfield, copperfield, and and give give all all of of you gentlemen, gentlemen, is, is, that that you could could be be took took up up and and brought brought here. here. when when i i think think of of my my past past follies, follies, and and my my present present state, state, i i am am sure sure it it would would be be best best for for you. i i pity pity all all who who ain't ain't brought brought here!' here!' he he sneaked sneaked back back into into his his cell, cell, amidst amidst a a little little chorus chorus of of approbation; approbation; and and both both traddles traddles and and i i experienced experienced a a great great relief relief when when he he was was locked locked in. in. it it was was a a characteristic characteristic feature feature in in this this repentance, repentance, that that i i was was fain fain to to ask ask what what these these two two men men had had done, done, to to be be there there at at all. all. that that appeared appeared to to be be the the last last thing thing about about which which they they had had anything anything to to say. say. i i addressed addressed myself myself to to one one of of the the two two warders, warders, who, who, i i suspected suspected from from certain certain latent latent indications indications in in their their faces, faces, knew knew pretty pretty well well what what all all this this stir stir was was worth. worth. 'do 'do you know,' know,' said said i, i, as as we we walked walked along along the the passage, passage, 'what 'what felony felony was was number number twenty twenty seven's seven's last last "folly"?' "folly"?' the the answer answer was was that that it it was was a a bank bank case. case. 'a 'a fraud fraud on on the the bank bank of of england?' england?' i i asked. asked. 'yes, 'yes, sir. sir. fraud, fraud, forgery, forgery, and and conspiracy. conspiracy. he he and and some some others. others. he he set set the the others others on. on. it it was was a a deep deep plot plot for for a a large large sum. sum. sentence, sentence, transportation transportation for for life. life. twenty twenty seven seven was was the the knowingest knowingest bird bird of of the the lot, lot, and and had had very very nearly nearly kept kept himself himself safe; safe; but but not not quite. quite. the the bank bank was was just just able able to to put put salt salt upon upon his his tail tail -- -- and and only only just.' just.' 'do 'do you know know twenty twenty eight's eight's offence?' offence?' 'twenty 'twenty eight,' eight,' returned returned my my informant, informant, speaking speaking throughout throughout in in a a low low tone, tone, and and looking looking over over his his shoulder shoulder as as we we walked walked along along the the passage, passage, to to guard guard himself himself from from being being overheard, overheard, in in such such an an unlawful unlawful reference reference to to these these immaculates, immaculates, by by creakle creakle and and the the rest; rest; 'twenty 'twenty eight eight (also (also transportation) transportation) got got a a place, place, and and robbed robbed a a young young master master of of a a matter matter of of two two hundred hundred and and fifty fifty pounds pounds in in money money and and valuables, valuables, the the night night before before they they were were going going abroad. abroad. i i particularly particularly recollect recollect his his case, case, from from his his being being took took by by a a dwarf.' dwarf.' 'a 'a what?' what?' 'a 'a little little woman. woman. i i have have forgot forgot her her name?' name?' 'not 'not mowcher?' mowcher?' 'that's 'that's it! it! he he had had eluded eluded pursuit, pursuit, and and was was going going to to america america in in a a flaxen flaxen wig, wig, and and whiskers, whiskers, and and such such a a complete complete disguise disguise as as never never you see see in in all all your your born born days; days; when when the the little little woman, woman, being being in in southampton, southampton, met met him him walking walking along along the the street street -- -- picked picked him him out out with with her her sharp sharp eye eye in in a a moment moment -- -- ran ran betwixt betwixt his his legs legs to to upset upset him him -- -- and and held held on on to to him him like like grim grim death.' death.' 'excellent 'excellent miss miss mowcher!' mowcher!' cried cried i. i. 'you'd 'you'd have have said said so, so, if if you had had seen seen her, her, standing standing on on a a chair chair in in the the witness-box witness-box at at the the trial, trial, as as i i did,' did,' said said my my friend. friend. 'he 'he cut cut her her face face right right open, open, and and pounded pounded her her in in the the most most brutal brutal manner, manner, when when she she took took him; him; but but she she never never loosed loosed her her hold hold till till he he was was locked locked up. up. she she held held so so tight tight to to him, him, in in fact, fact, that that the the officers officers were were obliged obliged to to take take 'em 'em both both together. together. she she gave gave her her evidence evidence in in the the gamest gamest way, way, and and was was highly highly complimented complimented by by the the bench, bench, and and cheered cheered right right home home to to her her lodgings. lodgings. she she said said in in court court that that she'd she'd have have took took him him single-handed single-handed (on (on account account of of what what she she knew knew concerning concerning him), him), if if he he had had been been samson. samson. and and it's it's my my belief belief she she would!' would!' it it was was mine mine too, too, and and i i highly highly respected respected miss miss mowcher mowcher for for it. it. we we had had now now seen seen all all there there was was to to see. see. it it would would have have been been in in vain vain to to represent represent to to such such a a man man as as the the worshipful worshipful mr. mr. creakle, creakle, that that twenty twenty seven seven and and twenty twenty eight eight were were perfectly perfectly consistent consistent and and unchanged; unchanged; that that exactly exactly what what they they were were then, then, they they had had always always been; been; that that the the hypocritical hypocritical knaves knaves were were just just the the subjects subjects to to make make that that sort sort of of profession profession in in such such a a place; place; that that they they knew knew its its market-value market-value at at least least as as well well as as we we did, did, in in the the immediate immediate service service it it would would do do them them when when they they were were expatriated; expatriated; in in a a word, word, that that it it was was a a rotten, rotten, hollow, hollow, painfully painfully suggestive suggestive piece piece of of business business altogether. altogether. we we left left them them to to their their system system and and themselves, themselves, and and went went home home wondering. wondering. 'perhaps 'perhaps it's it's a a good good thing, thing, traddles,' traddles,' said said i, i, 'to 'to have have an an unsound unsound hobby hobby ridden ridden hard; hard; for for it's it's the the sooner sooner ridden ridden to to death.' death.' 'i 'i hope hope so,' so,' replied replied traddles. traddles. chapter chapter 62. 62. a a light light shines shines on on my my way way the the year year came came round round to to christmas-time, christmas-time, and and i i had had been been at at home home above above two two months. months. i i had had seen seen agnes agnes frequently. frequently. however however loud loud the the general general voice voice might might be be in in giving giving me me encouragement, encouragement, and and however however fervent fervent the the emotions emotions and and endeavours endeavours to to which which it it roused roused me, me, i i heard heard her her lightest lightest word word of of praise praise as as i i heard heard nothing nothing else. else. at at least least once once a a week, week, and and sometimes sometimes oftener, oftener, i i rode rode over over there, there, and and passed passed the the evening. evening. i i usually usually rode rode back back at at night; night; for for the the old old unhappy unhappy sense sense was was always always hovering hovering about about me me now now -- -- most most sorrowfully sorrowfully when when i i left left her her -- -- and and i i was was glad glad to to be be up up and and out, out, rather rather than than wandering wandering over over the the past past in in weary weary wakefulness wakefulness or or miserable miserable dreams. dreams. i i wore wore away away the the longest longest part part of of many many wild wild sad sad nights, nights, in in those those rides; rides; reviving, reviving, as as i i went, went, the the thoughts thoughts that that had had occupied occupied me me in in my my long long absence. absence. or, or, if if i i were were to to say say rather rather that that i i listened listened to to the the echoes echoes of of those those thoughts, thoughts, i i should should better better express express the the truth. truth. they they spoke spoke to to me me from from afar afar off. off. i i had had put put them them at at a a distance, distance, and and accepted accepted my my inevitable inevitable place. place. when when i i read read to to agnes agnes what what i i wrote; wrote; when when i i saw saw her her listening listening face; face; moved moved her her to to smiles smiles or or tears; tears; and and heard heard her her cordial cordial voice voice so so earnest earnest on on the the shadowy shadowy events events of of that that imaginative imaginative world world in in which which i i lived; lived; i i thought thought what what a a fate fate mine mine might might have have been been -- -- but but only only thought thought so, so, as as i i had had thought thought after after i i was was married married to to dora, dora, what what i i could could have have wished wished my my wife wife to to be. be. my my duty duty to to agnes, agnes, who who loved loved me me with with a a love, love, which, which, if if i i disquieted, disquieted, i i wronged wronged most most selfishly selfishly and and poorly, poorly, and and could could never never restore; restore; my my matured matured assurance assurance that that i, i, who who had had worked worked out out my my own own destiny, destiny, and and won won what what i i had had impetuously impetuously set set my my heart heart on, on, had had no no right right to to murmur, murmur, and and must must bear; bear; comprised comprised what what i i felt felt and and what what i i had had learned. learned. but but i i loved loved her: her: and and now now it it even even became became some some consolation consolation to to me, me, vaguely vaguely to to conceive conceive a a distant distant day day when when i i might might blamelessly blamelessly avow avow it; it; when when all all this this should should be be over; over; when when i i could could say say 'agnes, 'agnes, so so it it was was when when i i came came home; home; and and now now i i am am old, old, and and i i never never have have loved loved since!' since!' she she did did not not once once show show me me any any change change in in herself. herself. what what she she always always had had been been to to me, me, she she still still was; was; wholly wholly unaltered. unaltered. between between my my aunt aunt and and me me there there had had been been something, something, in in this this connexion, connexion, since since the the night night of of my my return, return, which which i i cannot cannot call call a a restraint, restraint, or or an an avoidance avoidance of of the the subject, subject, so so much much as as an an implied implied understanding understanding that that we we thought thought of of it it together, together, but but did did not not shape shape our our thoughts thoughts into into words. words. when, when, according according to to our our old old custom, custom, we we sat sat before before the the fire fire at at night, night, we we often often fell fell into into this this train; train; as as naturally, naturally, and and as as consciously consciously to to each each other, other, as as if if we we had had unreservedly unreservedly said said so. so. but but we we preserved preserved an an unbroken unbroken silence. silence. i i believed believed that that she she had had read, read, or or partly partly read, read, my my thoughts thoughts that that night; night; and and that that she she fully fully comprehended comprehended why why i i gave gave mine mine no no more more distinct distinct expression. expression. this this christmas-time christmas-time being being come, come, and and agnes agnes having having reposed reposed no no new new confidence confidence in in me, me, a a doubt doubt that that had had several several times times arisen arisen in in my my mind mind -- -- whether whether she she could could have have that that perception perception of of the the true true state state of of my my breast, breast, which which restrained restrained her her with with the the apprehension apprehension of of giving giving me me pain pain -- -- began began to to oppress oppress me me heavily. heavily. if if that that were were so, so, my my sacrifice sacrifice was was nothing; nothing; my my plainest plainest obligation obligation to to her her unfulfilled; unfulfilled; and and every every poor poor action action i i had had shrunk shrunk from, from, i i was was hourly hourly doing. doing. i i resolved resolved to to set set this this right right beyond beyond all all doubt; doubt; -- -- if if such such a a barrier barrier were were between between us, us, to to break break it it down down at at once once with with a a determined determined hand. hand. it it was was -- -- what what lasting lasting reason reason have have i i to to remember remember it! it! -- -- a a cold, cold, harsh, harsh, winter winter day. day. there there had had been been snow, snow, some some hours hours before; before; and and it it lay, lay, not not deep, deep, but but hard-frozen hard-frozen on on the the ground. ground. out out at at sea, sea, beyond beyond my my window, window, the the wind wind blew blew ruggedly ruggedly from from the the north. north. i i had had been been thinking thinking of of it, it, sweeping sweeping over over those those mountain mountain wastes wastes of of snow snow in in switzerland, switzerland, then then inaccessible inaccessible to to any any human human foot; foot; and and had had been been speculating speculating which which was was the the lonelier, lonelier, those those solitary solitary regions, regions, or or a a deserted deserted ocean. ocean. 'riding 'riding today, today, trot?' trot?' said said my my aunt, aunt, putting putting her her head head in in at at the the door. door. 'yes,' 'yes,' said said i, i, 'i 'i am am going going over over to to canterbury. canterbury. it's it's a a good good day day for for a a ride.' ride.' 'i 'i hope hope your your horse horse may may think think so so too,' too,' said said my my aunt; aunt; 'but 'but at at present present he he is is holding holding down down his his head head and and his his ears, ears, standing standing before before the the door door there, there, as as if if he he thought thought his his stable stable preferable.' preferable.' my my aunt, aunt, i i may may observe, observe, allowed allowed my my horse horse on on the the forbidden forbidden ground, ground, but but had had not not at at all all relented relented towards towards the the donkeys. donkeys. 'he 'he will will be be fresh fresh enough, enough, presently!' presently!' said said i. i. 'the 'the ride ride will will do do his his master master good, good, at at all all events,' events,' observed observed my my aunt, aunt, glancing glancing at at the the papers papers on on my my table. table. 'ah, 'ah, child, child, you pass pass a a good good many many hours hours here! here! i i never never thought, thought, when when i i used used to to read read books, books, what what work work it it was was to to write write them.' them.' 'it's 'it's work work enough enough to to read read them, them, sometimes,' sometimes,' i i returned. returned. 'as 'as to to the the writing, writing, it it has has its its own own charms, charms, aunt.' aunt.' 'ah! 'ah! i i see!' see!' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'ambition, 'ambition, love love of of approbation, approbation, sympathy, sympathy, and and much much more, more, i i suppose? suppose? well: well: go go along along with with you!' 'do 'do you know know anything anything more,' more,' said said i, i, standing standing composedly composedly before before her her -- -- she she had had patted patted me me on on the the shoulder, shoulder, and and sat sat down down in in my my chair chair -- -- 'of 'of that that attachment attachment of of agnes?' agnes?' she she looked looked up up in in my my face face a a little little while, while, before before replying: replying: 'i 'i think think i i do, do, trot.' trot.' 'are 'are you confirmed confirmed in in your your impression?' impression?' i i inquired. inquired. 'i 'i think think i i am, am, trot.' trot.' she she looked looked so so steadfastly steadfastly at at me: me: with with a a kind kind of of doubt, doubt, or or pity, pity, or or suspense suspense in in her her affection: affection: that that i i summoned summoned the the stronger stronger determination determination to to show show her her a a perfectly perfectly cheerful cheerful face. face. 'and 'and what what is is more, more, trot trot -- -- ' ' said said my my aunt. aunt. 'yes!' 'yes!' 'i 'i think think agnes agnes is is going going to to be be married.' married.' 'god 'god bless bless her!' her!' said said i, i, cheerfully. cheerfully. 'god 'god bless bless her!' her!' said said my my aunt, aunt, 'and 'and her her husband husband too!' too!' i i echoed echoed it, it, parted parted from from my my aunt, aunt, and and went went lightly lightly downstairs, downstairs, mounted, mounted, and and rode rode away. away. there there was was greater greater reason reason than than before before to to do do what what i i had had resolved resolved to to do. do. how how well well i i recollect recollect the the wintry wintry ride! ride! the the frozen frozen particles particles of of ice, ice, brushed brushed from from the the blades blades of of grass grass by by the the wind, wind, and and borne borne across across my my face; face; the the hard hard clatter clatter of of the the horse's horse's hoofs, hoofs, beating beating a a tune tune upon upon the the ground; ground; the the stiff-tilled stiff-tilled soil; soil; the the snowdrift, snowdrift, lightly lightly eddying eddying in in the the chalk-pit chalk-pit as as the the breeze breeze ruffled ruffled it; it; the the smoking smoking team team with with the the waggon waggon of of old old hay, hay, stopping stopping to to breathe breathe on on the the hill-top, hill-top, and and shaking shaking their their bells bells musically; musically; the the whitened whitened slopes slopes and and sweeps sweeps of of down-land down-land lying lying against against the the dark dark sky, sky, as as if if they they were were drawn drawn on on a a huge huge slate! slate! i i found found agnes agnes alone. alone. the the little little girls girls had had gone gone to to their their own own homes homes now, now, and and she she was was alone alone by by the the fire, fire, reading. reading. she she put put down down her her book book on on seeing seeing me me come come in; in; and and having having welcomed welcomed me me as as usual, usual, took took her her work-basket work-basket and and sat sat in in one one of of the the old-fashioned old-fashioned windows. windows. i i sat sat beside beside her her on on the the window-seat, window-seat, and and we we talked talked of of what what i i was was doing, doing, and and when when it it would would be be done, done, and and of of the the progress progress i i had had made made since since my my last last visit. visit. agnes agnes was was very very cheerful; cheerful; and and laughingly laughingly predicted predicted that that i i should should soon soon become become too too famous famous to to be be talked talked to, to, on on such such subjects. subjects. 'so 'so i i make make the the most most of of the the present present time, time, you see,' see,' said said agnes, agnes, 'and 'and talk talk to to you while while i i may.' may.' as as i i looked looked at at her her beautiful beautiful face, face, observant observant of of her her work, work, she she raised raised her her mild mild clear clear eyes, eyes, and and saw saw that that i i was was looking looking at at her. her. 'you are are thoughtful thoughtful today, today, trotwood!' trotwood!' 'agnes, 'agnes, shall shall i i tell tell you what what about? about? i i came came to to tell tell you.' she she put put aside aside her her work, work, as as she she was was used used to to do do when when we we were were seriously seriously discussing discussing anything; anything; and and gave gave me me her her whole whole attention. attention. 'my 'my dear dear agnes, agnes, do do you doubt doubt my my being being true true to to you?' 'no!' 'no!' she she answered, answered, with with a a look look of of astonishment. astonishment. 'do 'do you doubt doubt my my being being what what i i always always have have been been to to you?' 'no!' 'no!' she she answered, answered, as as before. before. 'do 'do you remember remember that that i i tried tried to to tell tell you, when when i i came came home, home, what what a a debt debt of of gratitude gratitude i i owed owed you, dearest dearest agnes, agnes, and and how how fervently fervently i i felt felt towards towards you?' 'i 'i remember remember it,' it,' she she said, said, gently, gently, 'very 'very well.' well.' 'you have have a a secret,' secret,' said said i. i. 'let 'let me me share share it, it, agnes.' agnes.' she she cast cast down down her her eyes, eyes, and and trembled. trembled. 'i 'i could could hardly hardly fail fail to to know, know, even even if if i i had had not not heard heard -- -- but but from from other other lips lips than than yours, yours, agnes, agnes, which which seems seems strange strange -- -- that that there there is is someone someone upon upon whom whom you have have bestowed bestowed the the treasure treasure of of your your love. love. do do not not shut shut me me out out of of what what concerns concerns your your happiness happiness so so nearly! nearly! if if you can can trust trust me, me, as as you say say you can, can, and and as as i i know know you may, may, let let me me be be your your friend, friend, your your brother, brother, in in this this matter, matter, of of all all others!' others!' with with an an appealing, appealing, almost almost a a reproachful, reproachful, glance, glance, she she rose rose from from the the window; window; and and hurrying hurrying across across the the room room as as if if without without knowing knowing where, where, put put her her hands hands before before her her face, face, and and burst burst into into such such tears tears as as smote smote me me to to the the heart. heart. and and yet yet they they awakened awakened something something in in me, me, bringing bringing promise promise to to my my heart. heart. without without my my knowing knowing why, why, these these tears tears allied allied themselves themselves with with the the quietly quietly sad sad smile smile which which was was so so fixed fixed in in my my remembrance, remembrance, and and shook shook me me more more with with hope hope than than fear fear or or sorrow. sorrow. 'agnes! 'agnes! sister! sister! dearest! dearest! what what have have i i done?' done?' 'let 'let me me go go away, away, trotwood. trotwood. i i am am not not well. well. i i am am not not myself. myself. i i will will speak speak to to you by by and and by by -- -- another another time. time. i i will will write write to to you. don't don't speak speak to to me me now. now. don't! don't! don't!' don't!' i i sought sought to to recollect recollect what what she she had had said, said, when when i i had had spoken spoken to to her her on on that that former former night, night, of of her her affection affection needing needing no no return. return. it it seemed seemed a a very very world world that that i i must must search search through through in in a a moment. moment. 'agnes, 'agnes, i i cannot cannot bear bear to to see see you so, so, and and think think that that i i have have been been the the cause. cause. my my dearest dearest girl, girl, dearer dearer to to me me than than anything anything in in life, life, if if you are are unhappy, unhappy, let let me me share share your your unhappiness. unhappiness. if if you are are in in need need of of help help or or counsel, counsel, let let me me try try to to give give it it to to you. if if you have have indeed indeed a a burden burden on on your your heart, heart, let let me me try try to to lighten lighten it. it. for for whom whom do do i i live live now, now, agnes, agnes, if if it it is is not not for for you!' 'oh, 'oh, spare spare me! me! i i am am not not myself! myself! another another time!' time!' was was all all i i could could distinguish. distinguish. was was it it a a selfish selfish error error that that was was leading leading me me away? away? or, or, having having once once a a clue clue to to hope, hope, was was there there something something opening opening to to me me that that i i had had not not dared dared to to think think of? of? 'i 'i must must say say more. more. i i cannot cannot let let you leave leave me me so! so! for for heaven's heaven's sake, sake, agnes, agnes, let let us us not not mistake mistake each each other other after after all all these these years, years, and and all all that that has has come come and and gone gone with with them! them! i i must must speak speak plainly. plainly. if if you have have any any lingering lingering thought thought that that i i could could envy envy the the happiness happiness you will will confer; confer; that that i i could could not not resign resign you to to a a dearer dearer protector, protector, of of your your own own choosing; choosing; that that i i could could not, not, from from my my removed removed place, place, be be a a contented contented witness witness of of your your joy; joy; dismiss dismiss it, it, for for i i don't don't deserve deserve it! it! i i have have not not suffered suffered quite quite in in vain. vain. you have have not not taught taught me me quite quite in in vain. vain. there there is is no no alloy alloy of of self self in in what what i i feel feel for for you.' she she was was quiet quiet now. now. in in a a little little time, time, she she turned turned her her pale pale face face towards towards me, me, and and said said in in a a low low voice, voice, broken broken here here and and there, there, but but very very clear: clear: 'i 'i owe owe it it to to your your pure pure friendship friendship for for me, me, trotwood trotwood -- -- which, which, indeed, indeed, i i do do not not doubt doubt -- -- to to tell tell you, you are are mistaken. mistaken. i i can can do do no no more. more. if if i i have have sometimes, sometimes, in in the the course course of of years, years, wanted wanted help help and and counsel, counsel, they they have have come come to to me. me. if if i i have have sometimes sometimes been been unhappy, unhappy, the the feeling feeling has has passed passed away. away. if if i i have have ever ever had had a a burden burden on on my my heart, heart, it it has has been been lightened lightened for for me. me. if if i i have have any any secret, secret, it it is is -- -- no no new new one; one; and and is is -- -- not not what what you suppose. suppose. i i cannot cannot reveal reveal it, it, or or divide divide it. it. it it has has long long been been mine, mine, and and must must remain remain mine.' mine.' 'agnes! 'agnes! stay! stay! a a moment!' moment!' she she was was going going away, away, but but i i detained detained her. her. i i clasped clasped my my arm arm about about her her waist. waist. 'in 'in the the course course of of years!' years!' 'it 'it is is not not a a new new one!' one!' new new thoughts thoughts and and hopes hopes were were whirling whirling through through my my mind, mind, and and all all the the colours colours of of my my life life were were changing. changing. 'dearest 'dearest agnes! agnes! whom whom i i so so respect respect and and honour honour -- -- whom whom i i so so devotedly devotedly love! love! when when i i came came here here today, today, i i thought thought that that nothing nothing could could have have wrested wrested this this confession confession from from me. me. i i thought thought i i could could have have kept kept it it in in my my bosom bosom all all our our lives, lives, till till we we were were old. old. but, but, agnes, agnes, if if i i have have indeed indeed any any new-born new-born hope hope that that i i may may ever ever call call you something something more more than than sister, sister, widely widely different different from from sister! sister! -- -- ' ' her her tears tears fell fell fast; fast; but but they they were were not not like like those those she she had had lately lately shed, shed, and and i i saw saw my my hope hope brighten brighten in in them. them. 'agnes! 'agnes! ever ever my my guide, guide, and and best best support! support! if if you had had been been more more mindful mindful of of yourself, yourself, and and less less of of me, me, when when we we grew grew up up here here together, together, i i think think my my heedless heedless fancy fancy never never would would have have wandered wandered from from you. but but you were were so so much much better better than than i, i, so so necessary necessary to to me me in in every every boyish boyish hope hope and and disappointment, disappointment, that that to to have have you to to confide confide in, in, and and rely rely upon upon in in everything, everything, became became a a second second nature, nature, supplanting supplanting for for the the time time the the first first and and greater greater one one of of loving loving you as as i i do!' do!' still still weeping, weeping, but but not not sadly sadly -- -- joyfully! joyfully! and and clasped clasped in in my my arms arms as as she she had had never never been, been, as as i i had had thought thought she she never never was was to to be! be! 'when 'when i i loved loved dora dora -- -- fondly, fondly, agnes, agnes, as as you know know -- -- ' ' 'yes!' 'yes!' she she cried, cried, earnestly. earnestly. 'i 'i am am glad glad to to know know it!' it!' 'when 'when i i loved loved her her -- -- even even then, then, my my love love would would have have been been incomplete, incomplete, without without your your sympathy. sympathy. i i had had it, it, and and it it was was perfected. perfected. and and when when i i lost lost her, her, agnes, agnes, what what should should i i have have been been without without you, still!' still!' closer closer in in my my arms, arms, nearer nearer to to my my heart, heart, her her trembling trembling hand hand upon upon my my shoulder, shoulder, her her sweet sweet eyes eyes shining shining through through her her tears, tears, on on mine! mine! 'i 'i went went away, away, dear dear agnes, agnes, loving loving you. i i stayed stayed away, away, loving loving you. i i returned returned home, home, loving loving you!' and and now, now, i i tried tried to to tell tell her her of of the the struggle struggle i i had had had, had, and and the the conclusion conclusion i i had had come come to. to. i i tried tried to to lay lay my my mind mind before before her, her, truly, truly, and and entirely. entirely. i i tried tried to to show show her her how how i i had had hoped hoped i i had had come come into into the the better better knowledge knowledge of of myself myself and and of of her; her; how how i i had had resigned resigned myself myself to to what what that that better better knowledge knowledge brought; brought; and and how how i i had had come come there, there, even even that that day, day, in in my my fidelity fidelity to to this. this. if if she she did did so so love love me me (i (i said) said) that that she she could could take take me me for for her her husband, husband, she she could could do do so, so, on on no no deserving deserving of of mine, mine, except except upon upon the the truth truth of of my my love love for for her, her, and and the the trouble trouble in in which which it it had had ripened ripened to to be be what what it it was; was; and and hence hence it it was was that that i i revealed revealed it. it. and and o, o, agnes, agnes, even even out out of of thy thy true true eyes, eyes, in in that that same same time, time, the the spirit spirit of of my my child-wife child-wife looked looked upon upon me, me, saying saying it it was was well; well; and and winning winning me, me, through through thee, thee, to to tenderest tenderest recollections recollections of of the the blossom blossom that that had had withered withered in in its its bloom! bloom! 'i 'i am am so so blest, blest, trotwood trotwood -- -- my my heart heart is is so so overcharged overcharged -- -- but but there there is is one one thing thing i i must must say.' say.' 'dearest, 'dearest, what?' what?' she she laid laid her her gentle gentle hands hands upon upon my my shoulders, shoulders, and and looked looked calmly calmly in in my my face. face. 'do 'do you know, know, yet, yet, what what it it is?' is?' 'i 'i am am afraid afraid to to speculate speculate on on what what it it is. is. tell tell me, me, my my dear.' dear.' 'i 'i have have loved loved you all all my my life!' life!' o, o, we we were were happy, happy, we we were were happy! happy! our our tears tears were were not not for for the the trials trials (hers (hers so so much much the the greater) greater) through through which which we we had had come come to to be be thus, thus, but but for for the the rapture rapture of of being being thus, thus, never never to to be be divided divided more! more! we we walked, walked, that that winter winter evening, evening, in in the the fields fields together; together; and and the the blessed blessed calm calm within within us us seemed seemed to to be be partaken partaken by by the the frosty frosty air. air. the the early early stars stars began began to to shine shine while while we we were were lingering lingering on, on, and and looking looking up up to to them, them, we we thanked thanked our our god god for for having having guided guided us us to to this this tranquillity. tranquillity. we we stood stood together together in in the the same same old-fashioned old-fashioned window window at at night, night, when when the the moon moon was was shining; shining; agnes agnes with with her her quiet quiet eyes eyes raised raised up up to to it; it; i i following following her her glance. glance. long long miles miles of of road road then then opened opened out out before before my my mind; mind; and, and, toiling toiling on, on, i i saw saw a a ragged ragged way-worn way-worn boy, boy, forsaken forsaken and and neglected, neglected, who who should should come come to to call call even even the the heart heart now now beating beating against against mine, mine, his his own. own. it it was was nearly nearly dinner-time dinner-time next next day day when when we we appeared appeared before before my my aunt. aunt. she she was was up up in in my my study, study, peggotty peggotty said: said: which which it it was was her her pride pride to to keep keep in in readiness readiness and and order order for for me. me. we we found found her, her, in in her her spectacles, spectacles, sitting sitting by by the the fire. fire. 'goodness 'goodness me!' me!' said said my my aunt, aunt, peering peering through through the the dusk, dusk, 'who's 'who's this this you're you're bringing bringing home?' home?' 'agnes,' 'agnes,' said said i. i. as as we we had had arranged arranged to to say say nothing nothing at at first, first, my my aunt aunt was was not not a a little little discomfited. discomfited. she she darted darted a a hopeful hopeful glance glance at at me, me, when when i i said said 'agnes'; 'agnes'; but but seeing seeing that that i i looked looked as as usual, usual, she she took took off off her her spectacles spectacles in in despair, despair, and and rubbed rubbed her her nose nose with with them. them. she she greeted greeted agnes agnes heartily, heartily, nevertheless; nevertheless; and and we we were were soon soon in in the the lighted lighted parlour parlour downstairs, downstairs, at at dinner. dinner. my my aunt aunt put put on on her her spectacles spectacles twice twice or or thrice, thrice, to to take take another another look look at at me, me, but but as as often often took took them them off off again, again, disappointed, disappointed, and and rubbed rubbed her her nose nose with with them. them. much much to to the the discomfiture discomfiture of of mr. mr. dick, dick, who who knew knew this this to to be be a a bad bad symptom. symptom. 'by 'by the the by, by, aunt,' aunt,' said said i, i, after after dinner; dinner; 'i 'i have have been been speaking speaking to to agnes agnes about about what what you told told me.' me.' 'then, 'then, trot,' trot,' said said my my aunt, aunt, turning turning scarlet, scarlet, 'you did did wrong, wrong, and and broke broke your your promise.' promise.' 'you are are not not angry, angry, aunt, aunt, i i trust? trust? i i am am sure sure you won't won't be, be, when when you learn learn that that agnes agnes is is not not unhappy unhappy in in any any attachment.' attachment.' 'stuff 'stuff and and nonsense!' nonsense!' said said my my aunt. aunt. as as my my aunt aunt appeared appeared to to be be annoyed, annoyed, i i thought thought the the best best way way was was to to cut cut her her annoyance annoyance short. short. i i took took agnes agnes in in my my arm arm to to the the back back of of her her chair, chair, and and we we both both leaned leaned over over her. her. my my aunt, aunt, with with one one clap clap of of her her hands, hands, and and one one look look through through her her spectacles, spectacles, immediately immediately went went into into hysterics, hysterics, for for the the first first and and only only time time in in all all my my knowledge knowledge of of her. her. the the hysterics hysterics called called up up peggotty. peggotty. the the moment moment my my aunt aunt was was restored, restored, she she flew flew at at peggotty, peggotty, and and calling calling her her a a silly silly old old creature, creature, hugged hugged her her with with all all her her might. might. after after that, that, she she hugged hugged mr. mr. dick dick (who (who was was highly highly honoured, honoured, but but a a good good deal deal surprised); surprised); and and after after that, that, told told them them why. why. then, then, we we were were all all happy happy together. together. i i could could not not discover discover whether whether my my aunt, aunt, in in her her last last short short conversation conversation with with me, me, had had fallen fallen on on a a pious pious fraud, fraud, or or had had really really mistaken mistaken the the state state of of my my mind. mind. it it was was quite quite enough, enough, she she said, said, that that she she had had told told me me agnes agnes was was going going to to be be married; married; and and that that i i now now knew knew better better than than anyone anyone how how true true it it was. was. we we were were married married within within a a fortnight. fortnight. traddles traddles and and sophy, sophy, and and doctor doctor and and mrs. mrs. strong, strong, were were the the only only guests guests at at our our quiet quiet wedding. wedding. we we left left them them full full of of joy; joy; and and drove drove away away together. together. clasped clasped in in my my embrace, embrace, i i held held the the source source of of every every worthy worthy aspiration aspiration i i had had ever ever had; had; the the centre centre of of myself, myself, the the circle circle of of my my life, life, my my own, own, my my wife; wife; my my love love of of whom whom was was founded founded on on a a rock! rock! 'dearest 'dearest husband!' husband!' said said agnes. agnes. 'now 'now that that i i may may call call you by by that that name, name, i i have have one one thing thing more more to to tell tell you.' 'let 'let me me hear hear it, it, love.' love.' 'it 'it grows grows out out of of the the night night when when dora dora died. died. she she sent sent you for for me.' me.' 'she 'she did.' did.' 'she 'she told told me me that that she she left left me me something. something. can can you think think what what it it was?' was?' i i believed believed i i could. could. i i drew drew the the wife wife who who had had so so long long loved loved me, me, closer closer to to my my side. side. 'she 'she told told me me that that she she made made a a last last request request to to me, me, and and left left me me a a last last charge.' charge.' 'and 'and it it was was -- -- ' ' 'that 'that only only i i would would occupy occupy this this vacant vacant place.' place.' and and agnes agnes laid laid her her head head upon upon my my breast, breast, and and wept; wept; and and i i wept wept with with her, her, though though we we were were so so happy. happy. chapter chapter 63. 63. a a visitor visitor what what i i have have purposed purposed to to record record is is nearly nearly finished; finished; but but there there is is yet yet an an incident incident conspicuous conspicuous in in my my memory, memory, on on which which it it often often rests rests with with delight, delight, and and without without which which one one thread thread in in the the web web i i have have spun spun would would have have a a ravelled ravelled end. end. i i had had advanced advanced in in fame fame and and fortune, fortune, my my domestic domestic joy joy was was perfect, perfect, i i had had been been married married ten ten happy happy years. years. agnes agnes and and i i were were sitting sitting by by the the fire, fire, in in our our house house in in london, london, one one night night in in spring, spring, and and three three of of our our children children were were playing playing in in the the room, room, when when i i was was told told that that a a stranger stranger wished wished to to see see me. me. he he had had been been asked asked if if he he came came on on business, business, and and had had answered answered no; no; he he had had come come for for the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing me, me, and and had had come come a a long long way. way. he he was was an an old old man, man, my my servant servant said, said, and and looked looked like like a a farmer. farmer. as as this this sounded sounded mysterious mysterious to to the the children, children, and and moreover moreover was was like like the the beginning beginning of of a a favourite favourite story story agnes agnes used used to to tell tell them, them, introductory introductory to to the the arrival arrival of of a a wicked wicked old old fairy fairy in in a a cloak cloak who who hated hated everybody, everybody, it it produced produced some some commotion. commotion. one one of of our our boys boys laid laid his his head head in in his his mother's mother's lap lap to to be be out out of of harm's harm's way, way, and and little little agnes agnes (our (our eldest eldest child) child) left left her her doll doll in in a a chair chair to to represent represent her, her, and and thrust thrust out out her her little little heap heap of of golden golden curls curls from from between between the the window-curtains, window-curtains, to to see see what what happened happened next. next. 'let 'let him him come come in in here!' here!' said said i. i. there there soon soon appeared, appeared, pausing pausing in in the the dark dark doorway doorway as as he he entered, entered, a a hale, hale, grey-haired grey-haired old old man. man. little little agnes, agnes, attracted attracted by by his his looks, looks, had had run run to to bring bring him him in, in, and and i i had had not not yet yet clearly clearly seen seen his his face, face, when when my my wife, wife, starting starting up, up, cried cried out out to to me, me, in in a a pleased pleased and and agitated agitated voice, voice, that that it it was was mr. mr. peggotty! peggotty! it it was was mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. an an old old man man now, now, but but in in a a ruddy, ruddy, hearty, hearty, strong strong old old age. age. when when our our first first emotion emotion was was over, over, and and he he sat sat before before the the fire fire with with the the children children on on his his knees, knees, and and the the blaze blaze shining shining on on his his face, face, he he looked, looked, to to me, me, as as vigorous vigorous and and robust, robust, withal withal as as handsome, handsome, an an old old man, man, as as ever ever i i had had seen. seen. 'mas'r 'mas'r davy,' davy,' said said he. he. and and the the old old name name in in the the old old tone tone fell fell so so naturally naturally on on my my ear! ear! 'mas'r 'mas'r davy, davy, 'tis 'tis a a joyful joyful hour hour as as i i see see you, once once more, more, 'long 'long with with your your own own trew trew wife!' wife!' 'a 'a joyful joyful hour hour indeed, indeed, old old friend!' friend!' cried cried i. i. 'and 'and these these heer heer pretty pretty ones,' ones,' said said mr. mr. peggotty. peggotty. 'to 'to look look at at these these heer heer flowers! flowers! why, why, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, you was was but but the the heighth heighth of of the the littlest littlest of of these, these, when when i i first first see see you! when when em'ly em'ly warn't warn't no no bigger, bigger, and and our our poor poor lad lad were were but but a a lad!' lad!' 'time 'time has has changed changed me me more more than than it it has has changed changed you since since then,' then,' said said i. i. 'but 'but let let these these dear dear rogues rogues go go to to bed; bed; and and as as no no house house in in england england but but this this must must hold hold you, tell tell me me where where to to send send for for your your luggage luggage (is (is the the old old black black bag bag among among it, it, that that went went so so far, far, i i wonder!), wonder!), and and then, then, over over a a glass glass of of yarmouth yarmouth grog, grog, we we will will have have the the tidings tidings of of ten ten years!' years!' 'are 'are you alone?' alone?' asked asked agnes. agnes. 'yes, 'yes, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he said, said, kissing kissing her her hand, hand, 'quite 'quite alone.' alone.' we we sat sat him him between between us, us, not not knowing knowing how how to to give give him him welcome welcome enough; enough; and and as as i i began began to to listen listen to to his his old old familiar familiar voice, voice, i i could could have have fancied fancied he he was was still still pursuing pursuing his his long long journey journey in in search search of of his his darling darling niece. niece. 'it's 'it's a a mort mort of of water,' water,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'fur 'fur to to come come across, across, and and on'y on'y stay stay a a matter matter of of fower fower weeks. weeks. but but water water ('specially ('specially when when 'tis 'tis salt) salt) comes comes nat'ral nat'ral to to me; me; and and friends friends is is dear, dear, and and i i am am heer. heer. -- -- which which is is verse,' verse,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, surprised surprised to to find find it it out, out, 'though 'though i i hadn't hadn't such such intentions.' intentions.' 'are 'are you going going back back those those many many thousand thousand miles, miles, so so soon?' soon?' asked asked agnes. agnes. 'yes, 'yes, ma'am,' ma'am,' he he returned. returned. 'i 'i giv giv the the promise promise to to em'ly, em'ly, afore afore i i come come away. away. you see, see, i i doen't doen't grow grow younger younger as as the the years years comes comes round, round, and and if if i i hadn't hadn't sailed sailed as as 'twas, 'twas, most most like like i i shouldn't shouldn't never never have have done done 't. 't. and and it's it's allus allus been been on on my my mind, mind, as as i i must must come come and and see see mas'r mas'r davy davy and and your your own own sweet sweet blooming blooming self, self, in in your your wedded wedded happiness, happiness, afore afore i i got got to to be be too too old.' old.' he he looked looked at at us, us, as as if if he he could could never never feast feast his his eyes eyes on on us us sufficiently. sufficiently. agnes agnes laughingly laughingly put put back back some some scattered scattered locks locks of of his his grey grey hair, hair, that that he he might might see see us us better. better. 'and 'and now now tell tell us,' us,' said said i, i, 'everything 'everything relating relating to to your your fortunes.' fortunes.' 'our 'our fortuns, fortuns, mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' he he rejoined, rejoined, 'is 'is soon soon told. told. we we haven't haven't fared fared nohows, nohows, but but fared fared to to thrive. thrive. we've we've allus allus thrived. thrived. we've we've worked worked as as we we ought ought to to 't, 't, and and maybe maybe we we lived lived a a leetle leetle hard hard at at first first or or so, so, but but we we have have allus allus thrived. thrived. what what with with sheep-farming, sheep-farming, and and what what with with stock-farming, stock-farming, and and what what with with one one thing thing and and what what with with t'other, t'other, we we are are as as well well to to do, do, as as well well could could be. be. theer's theer's been been kiender kiender a a blessing blessing fell fell upon upon us,' us,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, reverentially reverentially inclining inclining his his head, head, 'and 'and we've we've done done nowt nowt but but prosper. prosper. that that is, is, in in the the long long run. run. if if not not yesterday, yesterday, why why then then today. today. if if not not today, today, why why then then tomorrow.' tomorrow.' 'and 'and emily?' emily?' said said agnes agnes and and i, i, both both together. together. 'em'ly,' 'em'ly,' said said he, he, 'arter 'arter you left left her, her, ma'am ma'am -- -- and and i i never never heerd heerd her her saying saying of of her her prayers prayers at at night, night, t'other t'other side side the the canvas canvas screen, screen, when when we we was was settled settled in in the the bush, bush, but but what what i i heerd heerd your your name name -- -- and and arter arter she she and and me me lost lost sight sight of of mas'r mas'r davy, davy, that that theer theer shining shining sundown sundown -- -- was was that that low, low, at at first, first, that, that, if if she she had had know'd know'd then then what what mas'r mas'r davy davy kep kep from from us us so so kind kind and and thowtful, thowtful, 'tis 'tis my my opinion opinion she'd she'd have have drooped drooped away. away. but but theer theer was was some some poor poor folks folks aboard aboard as as had had illness illness among among 'em, 'em, and and she she took took care care of of them; them; and and theer theer was was the the children children in in our our company, company, and and she she took took care care of of them; them; and and so so she she got got to to be be busy, busy, and and to to be be doing doing good, good, and and that that helped helped her.' her.' 'when 'when did did she she first first hear hear of of it?' it?' i i asked. asked. 'i 'i kep kep it it from from her her arter arter i i heerd heerd on on 't,' 't,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'going 'going on on nigh nigh a a year. year. we we was was living living then then in in a a solitary solitary place, place, but but among among the the beautifullest beautifullest trees, trees, and and with with the the roses roses a-covering a-covering our our beein beein to to the the roof. roof. theer theer come come along along one one day, day, when when i i was was out out a-working a-working on on the the land, land, a a traveller traveller from from our our own own norfolk norfolk or or suffolk suffolk in in england england (i (i doen't doen't rightly rightly mind mind which), which), and and of of course course we we took took him him in, in, and and giv giv him him to to eat eat and and drink, drink, and and made made him him welcome. welcome. we we all all do do that, that, all all the the colony colony over. over. he'd he'd got got an an old old newspaper newspaper with with him, him, and and some some other other account account in in print print of of the the storm. storm. that's that's how how she she know'd know'd it. it. when when i i came came home home at at night, night, i i found found she she know'd know'd it.' it.' he he dropped dropped his his voice voice as as he he said said these these words, words, and and the the gravity gravity i i so so well well remembered remembered overspread overspread his his face. face. 'did 'did it it change change her her much?' much?' we we asked. asked. 'aye, 'aye, for for a a good good long long time,' time,' he he said, said, shaking shaking his his head; head; 'if 'if not not to to this this present present hour. hour. but but i i think think the the solitoode solitoode done done her her good. good. and and she she had had a a deal deal to to mind mind in in the the way way of of poultry poultry and and the the like, like, and and minded minded of of it, it, and and come come through. through. i i wonder,' wonder,' he he said said thoughtfully, thoughtfully, 'if 'if you could could see see my my em'ly em'ly now, now, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, whether whether you'd you'd know know her!' her!' 'is 'is she she so so altered?' altered?' i i inquired. inquired. 'i 'i doen't doen't know. know. i i see see her her ev'ry ev'ry day, day, and and doen't doen't know; know; but, but, odd-times, odd-times, i i have have thowt thowt so. so. a a slight slight figure,' figure,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, looking looking at at the the fire, fire, 'kiender 'kiender worn; worn; soft, soft, sorrowful, sorrowful, blue blue eyes; eyes; a a delicate delicate face; face; a a pritty pritty head, head, leaning leaning a a little little down; down; a a quiet quiet voice voice and and way way -- -- timid timid a'most. a'most. that's that's em'ly!' em'ly!' we we silently silently observed observed him him as as he he sat, sat, still still looking looking at at the the fire. fire. 'some 'some thinks,' thinks,' he he said, said, 'as 'as her her affection affection was was ill-bestowed; ill-bestowed; some, some, as as her her marriage marriage was was broken broken off off by by death. death. no no one one knows knows how how 'tis. 'tis. she she might might have have married married well, well, a a mort mort of of times, times, "but, "but, uncle," uncle," she she says says to to me, me, "that's "that's gone gone for for ever." ever." cheerful cheerful along along with with me; me; retired retired when when others others is is by; by; fond fond of of going going any any distance distance fur fur to to teach teach a a child, child, or or fur fur to to tend tend a a sick sick person, person, or or fur fur to to do do some some kindness kindness tow'rds tow'rds a a young young girl's girl's wedding wedding (and (and she's she's done done a a many, many, but but has has never never seen seen one); one); fondly fondly loving loving of of her her uncle; uncle; patient; patient; liked liked by by young young and and old; old; sowt sowt out out by by all all that that has has any any trouble. trouble. that's that's em'ly!' em'ly!' he he drew drew his his hand hand across across his his face, face, and and with with a a half-suppressed half-suppressed sigh sigh looked looked up up from from the the fire. fire. 'is 'is martha martha with with you yet?' yet?' i i asked. asked. 'martha,' 'martha,' he he replied, replied, 'got 'got married, married, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, in in the the second second year. year. a a young young man, man, a a farm-labourer, farm-labourer, as as come come by by us us on on his his way way to to market market with with his his mas'r's mas'r's drays drays -- -- a a journey journey of of over over five five hundred hundred mile, mile, theer theer and and back back -- -- made made offers offers fur fur to to take take her her fur fur his his wife wife (wives (wives is is very very scarce scarce theer), theer), and and then then to to set set up up fur fur their their two two selves selves in in the the bush. bush. she she spoke spoke to to me me fur fur to to tell tell him him her her trew trew story. story. i i did. did. they they was was married, married, and and they they live live fower fower hundred hundred mile mile away away from from any any voices voices but but their their own own and and the the singing singing birds.' birds.' 'mrs. 'mrs. gummidge?' gummidge?' i i suggested. suggested. it it was was a a pleasant pleasant key key to to touch, touch, for for mr. mr. peggotty peggotty suddenly suddenly burst burst into into a a roar roar of of laughter, laughter, and and rubbed rubbed his his hands hands up up and and down down his his legs, legs, as as he he had had been been accustomed accustomed to to do do when when he he enjoyed enjoyed himself himself in in the the long-shipwrecked long-shipwrecked boat. boat. 'would 'would you believe believe it!' it!' he he said. said. 'why, 'why, someun someun even even made made offer offer fur fur to to marry marry her! her! if if a a ship's ship's cook cook that that was was turning turning settler, settler, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, didn't didn't make make offers offers fur fur to to marry marry missis missis gummidge, gummidge, i'm i'm gormed gormed -- -- and and i i can't can't say say no no fairer fairer than than that!' that!' i i never never saw saw agnes agnes laugh laugh so. so. this this sudden sudden ecstasy ecstasy on on the the part part of of mr. mr. peggotty peggotty was was so so delightful delightful to to her, her, that that she she could could not not leave leave off off laughing; laughing; and and the the more more she she laughed laughed the the more more she she made made me me laugh, laugh, and and the the greater greater mr. mr. peggotty's peggotty's ecstasy ecstasy became, became, and and the the more more he he rubbed rubbed his his legs. legs. 'and 'and what what did did mrs. mrs. gummidge gummidge say?' say?' i i asked, asked, when when i i was was grave grave enough. enough. 'if 'if you'll you'll believe believe me,' me,' returned returned mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'missis 'missis gummidge, gummidge, 'stead 'stead of of saying saying "thank "thank you, i'm i'm much much obleeged obleeged to to you, i i ain't ain't a-going a-going fur fur to to change change my my condition condition at at my my time time of of life," life," up'd up'd with with a a bucket bucket as as was was standing standing by, by, and and laid laid it it over over that that theer theer ship's ship's cook's cook's head head 'till 'till he he sung sung out out fur fur help, help, and and i i went went in in and and reskied reskied of of him.' him.' mr. mr. peggotty peggotty burst burst into into a a great great roar roar of of laughter, laughter, and and agnes agnes and and i i both both kept kept him him company. company. 'but 'but i i must must say say this, this, for for the the good good creetur,' creetur,' he he resumed, resumed, wiping wiping his his face, face, when when we we were were quite quite exhausted; exhausted; 'she 'she has has been been all all she she said said she'd she'd be be to to us, us, and and more. more. she's she's the the willingest, willingest, the the trewest, trewest, the the honestest-helping honestest-helping woman, woman, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, as as ever ever draw'd draw'd the the breath breath of of life. life. i i have have never never know'd know'd her her to to be be lone lone and and lorn, lorn, for for a a single single minute, minute, not not even even when when the the colony colony was was all all afore afore us, us, and and we we was was new new to to it. it. and and thinking thinking of of the the old old 'un 'un is is a a thing thing she she never never done, done, i i do do assure assure you, since since she she left left england!' england!' 'now, 'now, last, last, not not least, least, mr. mr. micawber,' micawber,' said said i. i. 'he 'he has has paid paid off off every every obligation obligation he he incurred incurred here here -- -- even even to to traddles's traddles's bill, bill, you remember remember my my dear dear agnes agnes -- -- and and therefore therefore we we may may take take it it for for granted granted that that he he is is doing doing well. well. but but what what is is the the latest latest news news of of him?' him?' mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, with with a a smile, smile, put put his his hand hand in in his his breast-pocket, breast-pocket, and and produced produced a a flat-folded, flat-folded, paper paper parcel, parcel, from from which which he he took took out, out, with with much much care, care, a a little little odd-looking odd-looking newspaper. newspaper. 'you are are to to understan', understan', mas'r mas'r davy,' davy,' said said he, he, 'as 'as we we have have left left the the bush bush now, now, being being so so well well to to do; do; and and have have gone gone right right away away round round to to port port middlebay middlebay harbour, harbour, wheer wheer theer's theer's what what we we call call a a town.' town.' 'mr. 'mr. micawber micawber was was in in the the bush bush near near you?' said said i. i. 'bless 'bless you, yes,' yes,' said said mr. mr. peggotty, peggotty, 'and 'and turned turned to to with with a a will. will. i i never never wish wish to to meet meet a a better better gen'l'man gen'l'man for for turning turning to to with with a a will. will. i've i've seen seen that that theer theer bald bald head head of of his his a a perspiring perspiring in in the the sun, sun, mas'r mas'r davy, davy, till till i i a'most a'most thowt thowt it it would would have have melted melted away. away. and and now now he's he's a a magistrate.' magistrate.' 'a 'a magistrate, magistrate, eh?' eh?' said said i. i. mr. mr. peggotty peggotty pointed pointed to to a a certain certain paragraph paragraph in in the the newspaper, newspaper, where where i i read read aloud aloud as as follows, follows, from from the the port port middlebay middlebay times: times: 'the 'the public public dinner dinner to to our our distinguished distinguished fellow-colonist fellow-colonist and and townsman, townsman, wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, esquire, esquire, port port middlebay middlebay district district magistrate, magistrate, came came off off yesterday yesterday in in the the large large room room of of the the hotel, hotel, which which was was crowded crowded to to suffocation. suffocation. it it is is estimated estimated that that not not fewer fewer than than forty-seven forty-seven persons persons must must have have been been accommodated accommodated with with dinner dinner at at one one time, time, exclusive exclusive of of the the company company in in the the passage passage and and on on the the stairs. stairs. the the beauty, beauty, fashion, fashion, and and exclusiveness exclusiveness of of port port middlebay, middlebay, flocked flocked to to do do honour honour to to one one so so deservedly deservedly esteemed, esteemed, so so highly highly talented, talented, and and so so widely widely popular. popular. doctor doctor mell mell (of (of colonial colonial salem-house salem-house grammar grammar school, school, port port middlebay) middlebay) presided, presided, and and on on his his right right sat sat the the distinguished distinguished guest. guest. after after the the removal removal of of the the cloth, cloth, and and the the singing singing of of non non nobis nobis (beautifully (beautifully executed, executed, and and in in which which we we were were at at no no loss loss to to distinguish distinguish the the bell-like bell-like notes notes of of that that gifted gifted amateur, amateur, wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, esquire, esquire, junior), junior), the the usual usual loyal loyal and and patriotic patriotic toasts toasts were were severally severally given given and and rapturously rapturously received. received. doctor doctor mell, mell, in in a a speech speech replete replete with with feeling, feeling, then then proposed proposed "our "our distinguished distinguished guest, guest, the the ornament ornament of of our our town. town. may may he he never never leave leave us us but but to to better better himself, himself, and and may may his his success success among among us us be be such such as as to to render render his his bettering bettering himself himself impossible!" impossible!" the the cheering cheering with with which which the the toast toast was was received received defies defies description. description. again again and and again again it it rose rose and and fell, fell, like like the the waves waves of of ocean. ocean. at at length length all all was was hushed, hushed, and and wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, esquire, esquire, presented presented himself himself to to return return thanks. thanks. far far be be it it from from us, us, in in the the present present comparatively comparatively imperfect imperfect state state of of the the resources resources of of our our establishment, establishment, to to endeavour endeavour to to follow follow our our distinguished distinguished townsman townsman through through the the smoothly-flowing smoothly-flowing periods periods of of his his polished polished and and highly-ornate highly-ornate address! address! suffice suffice it it to to observe, observe, that that it it was was a a masterpiece masterpiece of of eloquence; eloquence; and and that that those those passages passages in in which which he he more more particularly particularly traced traced his his own own successful successful career career to to its its source, source, and and warned warned the the younger younger portion portion of of his his auditory auditory from from the the shoals shoals of of ever ever incurring incurring pecuniary pecuniary liabilities liabilities which which they they were were unable unable to to liquidate, liquidate, brought brought a a tear tear into into the the manliest manliest eye eye present. present. the the remaining remaining toasts toasts were were doctor doctor mell; mell; mrs. mrs. micawber micawber (who (who gracefully gracefully bowed bowed her her acknowledgements acknowledgements from from the the side-door, side-door, where where a a galaxy galaxy of of beauty beauty was was elevated elevated on on chairs, chairs, at at once once to to witness witness and and adorn adorn the the gratifying gratifying scene), scene), mrs. mrs. ridger ridger begs begs (late (late miss miss micawber); micawber); mrs. mrs. mell; mell; wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, esquire, esquire, junior junior (who (who convulsed convulsed the the assembly assembly by by humorously humorously remarking remarking that that he he found found himself himself unable unable to to return return thanks thanks in in a a speech, speech, but but would would do do so, so, with with their their permission, permission, in in a a song); song); mrs. mrs. micawber's micawber's family family (well (well known, known, it it is is needless needless to to remark, remark, in in the the mother-country), mother-country), &c. &c. &c. &c. &c. &c. at at the the conclusion conclusion of of the the proceedings proceedings the the tables tables were were cleared cleared as as if if by by art-magic art-magic for for dancing. dancing. among among the the votaries votaries of of terpsichore, terpsichore, who who disported disported themselves themselves until until sol sol gave gave warning warning for for departure, departure, wilkins wilkins micawber, micawber, esquire, esquire, junior, junior, and and the the lovely lovely and and accomplished accomplished miss miss helena, helena, fourth fourth daughter daughter of of doctor doctor mell, mell, were were particularly particularly remarkable.' remarkable.' i i was was looking looking back back to to the the name name of of doctor doctor mell, mell, pleased pleased to to have have discovered, discovered, in in these these happier happier circumstances, circumstances, mr. mr. mell, mell, formerly formerly poor poor pinched pinched usher usher to to my my middlesex middlesex magistrate, magistrate, when when mr. mr. peggotty peggotty pointing pointing to to another another part part of of the the paper, paper, my my eyes eyes rested rested on on my my own own name, name, and and i i read read thus: thus: 'to 'to david david copperfield, copperfield, esquire, esquire, 'the 'the eminent eminent author. author. 'my 'my dear dear sir, sir, 'years 'years have have elapsed, elapsed, since since i i had had an an opportunity opportunity of of ocularly ocularly perusing perusing the the lineaments, lineaments, now now familiar familiar to to the the imaginations imaginations of of a a considerable considerable portion portion of of the the civilized civilized world. world. 'but, 'but, my my dear dear sir, sir, though though estranged estranged (by (by the the force force of of circumstances circumstances over over which which i i have have had had no no control) control) from from the the personal personal society society of of the the friend friend and and companion companion of of my my youth, youth, i i have have not not been been unmindful unmindful of of his his soaring soaring flight. flight. nor nor have have i i been been debarred, debarred, though though seas seas between between us us braid braid ha' ha' roared, roared, (burns) (burns) from from participating participating in in the the intellectual intellectual feasts feasts he he has has spread spread before before us. us. 'i 'i cannot, cannot, therefore, therefore, allow allow of of the the departure departure from from this this place place of of an an individual individual whom whom we we mutually mutually respect respect and and esteem, esteem, without, without, my my dear dear sir, sir, taking taking this this public public opportunity opportunity of of thanking thanking you, on on my my own own behalf, behalf, and, and, i i may may undertake undertake to to add, add, on on that that of of the the whole whole of of the the inhabitants inhabitants of of port port middlebay, middlebay, for for the the gratification gratification of of which which you are are the the ministering ministering agent. agent. 'go 'go on, on, my my dear dear sir! sir! you are are not not unknown unknown here, here, you are are not not unappreciated. unappreciated. though though "remote", "remote", we we are are neither neither "unfriended", "unfriended", "melancholy", "melancholy", nor nor (i (i may may add) add) "slow". "slow". go go on, on, my my dear dear sir, sir, in in your your eagle eagle course! course! the the inhabitants inhabitants of of port port middlebay middlebay may may at at least least aspire aspire to to watch watch it, it, with with delight, delight, with with entertainment, entertainment, with with instruction! instruction! 'among 'among the the eyes eyes elevated elevated towards towards you from from this this portion portion of of the the globe, globe, will will ever ever be be found, found, while while it it has has light light and and life, life, 'the 'the 'eye 'eye 'appertaining 'appertaining to to 'wilkins 'wilkins micawber, micawber, 'magistrate.' 'magistrate.' i i found, found, on on glancing glancing at at the the remaining remaining contents contents of of the the newspaper, newspaper, that that mr. mr. micawber micawber was was a a diligent diligent and and esteemed esteemed correspondent correspondent of of that that journal. journal. there there was was another another letter letter from from him him in in the the same same paper, paper, touching touching a a bridge; bridge; there there was was an an advertisement advertisement of of a a collection collection of of similar similar letters letters by by him, him, to to be be shortly shortly republished, republished, in in a a neat neat volume, volume, 'with 'with considerable considerable additions'; additions'; and, and, unless unless i i am am very very much much mistaken, mistaken, the the leading leading article article was was his his also. also. we we talked talked much much of of mr. mr. micawber, micawber, on on many many other other evenings evenings while while mr. mr. peggotty peggotty remained remained with with us. us. he he lived lived with with us us during during the the whole whole term term of of his his stay, stay, -- -- which, which, i i think, think, was was something something less less than than a a month, month, -- -- and and his his sister sister and and my my aunt aunt came came to to london london to to see see him. him. agnes agnes and and i i parted parted from from him him aboard-ship, aboard-ship, when when he he sailed; sailed; and and we we shall shall never never part part from from him him more, more, on on earth. earth. but but before before he he left, left, he he went went with with me me to to yarmouth, yarmouth, to to see see a a little little tablet tablet i i had had put put up up in in the the churchyard churchyard to to the the memory memory of of ham. ham. while while i i was was copying copying the the plain plain inscription inscription for for him him at at his his request, request, i i saw saw him him stoop, stoop, and and gather gather a a tuft tuft of of grass grass from from the the grave grave and and a a little little earth. earth. 'for 'for em'ly,' em'ly,' he he said, said, as as he he put put it it in in his his breast. breast. 'i 'i promised, promised, mas'r mas'r davy.' davy.' chapter chapter 64. 64. a a last last retrospect retrospect and and now now my my written written story story ends. ends. i i look look back, back, once once more more -- -- for for the the last last time time -- -- before before i i close close these these leaves. leaves. i i see see myself, myself, with with agnes agnes at at my my side, side, journeying journeying along along the the road road of of life. life. i i see see our our children children and and our our friends friends around around us; us; and and i i hear hear the the roar roar of of many many voices, voices, not not indifferent indifferent to to me me as as i i travel travel on. on. what what faces faces are are the the most most distinct distinct to to me me in in the the fleeting fleeting crowd? crowd? lo, lo, these; these; all all turning turning to to me me as as i i ask ask my my thoughts thoughts the the question! question! here here is is my my aunt, aunt, in in stronger stronger spectacles, spectacles, an an old old woman woman of of four-score four-score years years and and more, more, but but upright upright yet, yet, and and a a steady steady walker walker of of six six miles miles at at a a stretch stretch in in winter winter weather. weather. always always with with her, her, here here comes comes peggotty, peggotty, my my good good old old nurse, nurse, likewise likewise in in spectacles, spectacles, accustomed accustomed to to do do needle-work needle-work at at night night very very close close to to the the lamp, lamp, but but never never sitting sitting down down to to it it without without a a bit bit of of wax wax candle, candle, a a yard-measure yard-measure in in a a little little house, house, and and a a work-box work-box with with a a picture picture of of st. st. paul's paul's upon upon the the lid. lid. the the cheeks cheeks and and arms arms of of peggotty, peggotty, so so hard hard and and red red in in my my childish childish days, days, when when i i wondered wondered why why the the birds birds didn't didn't peck peck her her in in preference preference to to apples, apples, are are shrivelled shrivelled now; now; and and her her eyes, eyes, that that used used to to darken darken their their whole whole neighbourhood neighbourhood in in her her face, face, are are fainter fainter (though (though they they glitter glitter still); still); but but her her rough rough forefinger, forefinger, which which i i once once associated associated with with a a pocket pocket nutmeg-grater, nutmeg-grater, is is just just the the same, same, and and when when i i see see my my least least child child catching catching at at it it as as it it totters totters from from my my aunt aunt to to her, her, i i think think of of our our little little parlour parlour at at home, home, when when i i could could scarcely scarcely walk. walk. my my aunt's aunt's old old disappointment disappointment is is set set right, right, now. now. she she is is godmother godmother to to a a real real living living betsey betsey trotwood; trotwood; and and dora dora (the (the next next in in order) order) says says she she spoils spoils her. her. there there is is something something bulky bulky in in peggotty's peggotty's pocket. pocket. it it is is nothing nothing smaller smaller than than the the crocodile crocodile book, book, which which is is in in rather rather a a dilapidated dilapidated condition condition by by this this time, time, with with divers divers of of the the leaves leaves torn torn and and stitched stitched across, across, but but which which peggotty peggotty exhibits exhibits to to the the children children as as a a precious precious relic. relic. i i find find it it very very curious curious to to see see my my own own infant infant face, face, looking looking up up at at me me from from the the crocodile crocodile stories; stories; and and to to be be reminded reminded by by it it of of my my old old acquaintance acquaintance brooks brooks of of sheffield. sheffield. among among my my boys, boys, this this summer summer holiday holiday time, time, i i see see an an old old man man making making giant giant kites, kites, and and gazing gazing at at them them in in the the air, air, with with a a delight delight for for which which there there are are no no words. words. he he greets greets me me rapturously, rapturously, and and whispers, whispers, with with many many nods nods and and winks, winks, 'trotwood, 'trotwood, you will will be be glad glad to to hear hear that that i i shall shall finish finish the the memorial memorial when when i i have have nothing nothing else else to to do, do, and and that that your your aunt's aunt's the the most most extraordinary extraordinary woman woman in in the the world, world, sir!' sir!' who who is is this this bent bent lady, lady, supporting supporting herself herself by by a a stick, stick, and and showing showing me me a a countenance countenance in in which which there there are are some some traces traces of of old old pride pride and and beauty, beauty, feebly feebly contending contending with with a a querulous, querulous, imbecile, imbecile, fretful fretful wandering wandering of of the the mind? mind? she she is is in in a a garden; garden; and and near near her her stands stands a a sharp, sharp, dark, dark, withered withered woman, woman, with with a a white white scar scar on on her her lip. lip. let let me me hear hear what what they they say. say. 'rosa, 'rosa, i i have have forgotten forgotten this this gentleman's gentleman's name.' name.' rosa rosa bends bends over over her, her, and and calls calls to to her, her, 'mr. 'mr. copperfield.' copperfield.' 'i 'i am am glad glad to to see see you, sir. sir. i i am am sorry sorry to to observe observe you are are in in mourning. mourning. i i hope hope time time will will be be good good to to you.' her her impatient impatient attendant attendant scolds scolds her, her, tells tells her her i i am am not not in in mourning, mourning, bids bids her her look look again, again, tries tries to to rouse rouse her. her. 'you have have seen seen my my son, son, sir,' sir,' says says the the elder elder lady. lady. 'are 'are you reconciled?' reconciled?' looking looking fixedly fixedly at at me, me, she she puts puts her her hand hand to to her her forehead, forehead, and and moans. moans. suddenly, suddenly, she she cries, cries, in in a a terrible terrible voice, voice, 'rosa, 'rosa, come come to to me. me. he he is is dead!' dead!' rosa rosa kneeling kneeling at at her her feet, feet, by by turns turns caresses caresses her, her, and and quarrels quarrels with with her; her; now now fiercely fiercely telling telling her, her, 'i 'i loved loved him him better better than than you ever ever did!' did!' -- -- now now soothing soothing her her to to sleep sleep on on her her breast, breast, like like a a sick sick child. child. thus thus i i leave leave them; them; thus thus i i always always find find them; them; thus thus they they wear wear their their time time away, away, from from year year to to year. year. what what ship ship comes comes sailing sailing home home from from india, india, and and what what english english lady lady is is this, this, married married to to a a growling growling old old scotch scotch croesus croesus with with great great flaps flaps of of ears? ears? can can this this be be julia julia mills? mills? indeed indeed it it is is julia julia mills, mills, peevish peevish and and fine, fine, with with a a black black man man to to carry carry cards cards and and letters letters to to her her on on a a golden golden salver, salver, and and a a copper-coloured copper-coloured woman woman in in linen, linen, with with a a bright bright handkerchief handkerchief round round her her head, head, to to serve serve her her tiffin tiffin in in her her dressing-room. dressing-room. but but julia julia keeps keeps no no diary diary in in these these days; days; never never sings sings affection's affection's dirge; dirge; eternally eternally quarrels quarrels with with the the old old scotch scotch croesus, croesus, who who is is a a sort sort of of yellow yellow bear bear with with a a tanned tanned hide. hide. julia julia is is steeped steeped in in money money to to the the throat, throat, and and talks talks and and thinks thinks of of nothing nothing else. else. i i liked liked her her better better in in the the desert desert of of sahara. sahara. or or perhaps perhaps this this is is the the desert desert of of sahara! sahara! for, for, though though julia julia has has a a stately stately house, house, and and mighty mighty company, company, and and sumptuous sumptuous dinners dinners every every day, day, i i see see no no green green growth growth near near her; her; nothing nothing that that can can ever ever come come to to fruit fruit or or flower. flower. what what julia julia calls calls 'society', 'society', i i see; see; among among it it mr. mr. jack jack maldon, maldon, from from his his patent patent place, place, sneering sneering at at the the hand hand that that gave gave it it him, him, and and speaking speaking to to me me of of the the doctor doctor as as 'so 'so charmingly charmingly antique'. antique'. but but when when society society is is the the name name for for such such hollow hollow gentlemen gentlemen and and ladies, ladies, julia, julia, and and when when its its breeding breeding is is professed professed indifference indifference to to everything everything that that can can advance advance or or can can retard retard mankind, mankind, i i think think we we must must have have lost lost ourselves ourselves in in that that same same desert desert of of sahara, sahara, and and had had better better find find the the way way out. out. and and lo, lo, the the doctor, doctor, always always our our good good friend, friend, labouring labouring at at his his dictionary dictionary (somewhere (somewhere about about the the letter letter d), d), and and happy happy in in his his home home and and wife. wife. also also the the old old soldier, soldier, on on a a considerably considerably reduced reduced footing, footing, and and by by no no means means so so influential influential as as in in days days of of yore! yore! working working at at his his chambers chambers in in the the temple, temple, with with a a busy busy aspect, aspect, and and his his hair hair (where (where he he is is not not bald) bald) made made more more rebellious rebellious than than ever ever by by the the constant constant friction friction of of his his lawyer's-wig, lawyer's-wig, i i come, come, in in a a later later time, time, upon upon my my dear dear old old traddles. traddles. his his table table is is covered covered with with thick thick piles piles of of papers; papers; and and i i say, say, as as i i look look around around me: me: 'if 'if sophy sophy were were your your clerk, clerk, now, now, traddles, traddles, she she would would have have enough enough to to do!' do!' 'you may may say say that, that, my my dear dear copperfield! copperfield! but but those those were were capital capital days, days, too, too, in in holborn holborn court! court! were were they they not?' not?' 'when 'when she she told told you you would would be be a a judge? judge? but but it it was was not not the the town town talk talk then!' then!' 'at 'at all all events,' events,' says says traddles, traddles, 'if 'if i i ever ever am am one one -- -- ' ' 'why, 'why, you know know you will will be.' be.' 'well, 'well, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, when when i i am am one, one, i i shall shall tell tell the the story, story, as as i i said said i i would.' would.' we we walk walk away, away, arm arm in in arm. arm. i i am am going going to to have have a a family family dinner dinner with with traddles. traddles. it it is is sophy's sophy's birthday; birthday; and, and, on on our our road, road, traddles traddles discourses discourses to to me me of of the the good good fortune fortune he he has has enjoyed. enjoyed. 'i 'i really really have have been been able, able, my my dear dear copperfield, copperfield, to to do do all all that that i i had had most most at at heart. heart. there's there's the the reverend reverend horace horace promoted promoted to to that that living living at at four four hundred hundred and and fifty fifty pounds pounds a a year; year; there there are are our our two two boys boys receiving receiving the the very very best best education, education, and and distinguishing distinguishing themselves themselves as as steady steady scholars scholars and and good good fellows; fellows; there there are are three three of of the the girls girls married married very very comfortably; comfortably; there there are are three three more more living living with with us; us; there there are are three three more more keeping keeping house house for for the the reverend reverend horace horace since since mrs. mrs. crewler's crewler's decease; decease; and and all all of of them them happy.' happy.' 'except 'except -- -- ' ' i i suggest. suggest. 'except 'except the the beauty,' beauty,' says says traddles. traddles. 'yes. 'yes. it it was was very very unfortunate unfortunate that that she she should should marry marry such such a a vagabond. vagabond. but but there there was was a a certain certain dash dash and and glare glare about about him him that that caught caught her. her. however, however, now now we we have have got got her her safe safe at at our our house, house, and and got got rid rid of of him, him, we we must must cheer cheer her her up up again.' again.' traddles's traddles's house house is is one one of of the the very very houses houses -- -- or or it it easily easily may may have have been been -- -- which which he he and and sophy sophy used used to to parcel parcel out, out, in in their their evening evening walks. walks. it it is is a a large large house; house; but but traddles traddles keeps keeps his his papers papers in in his his dressing-room dressing-room and and his his boots boots with with his his papers; papers; and and he he and and sophy sophy squeeze squeeze themselves themselves into into upper upper rooms, rooms, reserving reserving the the best best bedrooms bedrooms for for the the beauty beauty and and the the girls. girls. there there is is no no room room to to spare spare in in the the house; house; for for more more of of 'the 'the girls' girls' are are here, here, and and always always are are here, here, by by some some accident accident or or other, other, than than i i know know how how to to count. count. here, here, when when we we go go in, in, is is a a crowd crowd of of them, them, running running down down to to the the door, door, and and handing handing traddles traddles about about to to be be kissed, kissed, until until he he is is out out of of breath. breath. here, here, established established in in perpetuity, perpetuity, is is the the poor poor beauty, beauty, a a widow widow with with a a little little girl; girl; here, here, at at dinner dinner on on sophy's sophy's birthday, birthday, are are the the three three married married girls girls with with their their three three husbands, husbands, and and one one of of the the husband's husband's brothers, brothers, and and another another husband's husband's cousin, cousin, and and another another husband's husband's sister, sister, who who appears appears to to me me to to be be engaged engaged to to the the cousin. cousin. traddles, traddles, exactly exactly the the same same simple, simple, unaffected unaffected fellow fellow as as he he ever ever was, was, sits sits at at the the foot foot of of the the large large table table like like a a patriarch; patriarch; and and sophy sophy beams beams upon upon him, him, from from the the head, head, across across a a cheerful cheerful space space that that is is certainly certainly not not glittering glittering with with britannia britannia metal. metal. and and now, now, as as i i close close my my task, task, subduing subduing my my desire desire to to linger linger yet, yet, these these faces faces fade fade away. away. but but one one face, face, shining shining on on me me like like a a heavenly heavenly light light by by which which i i see see all all other other objects, objects, is is above above them them and and beyond beyond them them all. all. and and that that remains. remains. i i turn turn my my head, head, and and see see it, it, in in its its beautiful beautiful serenity, serenity, beside beside me. me. my my lamp lamp burns burns low, low, and and i i have have written written far far into into the the night; night; but but the the dear dear presence, presence, without without which which i i were were nothing, nothing, bears bears me me company. company. o o agnes, agnes, o o my my soul, soul, so so may may thy thy face face be be by by me me when when i i close close my my life life indeed; indeed; so so may may i, i, when when realities realities are are melting melting from from me, me, like like the the shadows shadows which which i i now now dismiss, dismiss, still still find find thee thee near near me, me, pointing pointing upward! upward! end end of of the the project project gutenberg gutenberg ebook ebook of of david david copperfield, copperfield, by by charles charles dickens dickens *** *** end end of of this this project project gutenberg gutenberg ebook ebook david david copperfield copperfield *** *** ***** ***** this this file file should should be be named named 766.txt 766.txt or or 766.zip 766.zip ***** ***** this this and and all all associated associated files files of of various various formats formats will will be be found found in: in: http://www.gutenberg.org/7/6/766/ http://www.gutenberg.org/7/6/766/ produced produced by by jo jo churcher churcher updated updated editions editions will will replace replace the the previous previous one one -- -- the the old old editions editions will will be be renamed. renamed. creating creating the the works works from from public public domain domain print print editions editions means means that that no no one one owns owns a a united united states states copyright copyright in in these these works, works, so so the the foundation foundation (and (and you!) can can copy copy and and distribute distribute it it in in the the united united states states without without permission permission and and without without paying paying copyright copyright royalties. royalties. special special rules, rules, set set forth forth in in the the general general terms terms of of use use part part of of this this license, license, apply apply to to copying copying and and distributing distributing project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works to to protect protect the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm concept concept and and trademark. trademark. project project gutenberg gutenberg is is a a registered registered trademark, trademark, and and may may not not be be used used if if you charge charge for for the the ebooks, ebooks, unless unless you receive receive specific specific permission. permission. if if you do do not not charge charge anything anything for for copies copies of of this this ebook, ebook, complying complying with with the the rules rules is is very very easy. easy. you may may use use this this ebook ebook for for nearly nearly any any purpose purpose such such as as creation creation of of derivative derivative works, works, reports, reports, performances performances and and research. research. they they may may be be modified modified and and printed printed and and given given away away -- -- you may may do do practically practically anything anything with with public public domain domain ebooks. ebooks. redistribution redistribution is is subject subject to to the the trademark trademark license, license, especially especially commercial commercial redistribution. redistribution. *** *** start: start: full full license license *** *** the the full full project project gutenberg gutenberg license license please please read read this this before before you distribute distribute or or use use this this work work to to protect protect the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm mission mission of of promoting promoting the the free free distribution distribution of of electronic electronic works, works, by by using using or or distributing distributing this this work work (or (or any any other other work work associated associated in in any any way way with with the the phrase phrase "project "project gutenberg"), gutenberg"), you agree agree to to comply comply with with all all the the terms terms of of the the full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license (available (available with with this this file file or or online online at at http://gutenberg.org/license). http://gutenberg.org/license). section section 1. 1. general general terms terms of of use use and and redistributing redistributing project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works 1.a. 1.a. by by reading reading or or using using any any part part of of this this project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work, work, you indicate indicate that that you have have read, read, understand, understand, agree agree to to and and accept accept all all the the terms terms of of this this license license and and intellectual intellectual property property (trademark/copyright) (trademark/copyright) agreement. agreement. if if you do do not not agree agree to to abide abide by by all all the the terms terms of of this this agreement, agreement, you must must cease cease using using and and return return or or destroy destroy all all copies copies of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works in in your your possession. possession. if if you paid paid a a fee fee for for obtaining obtaining a a copy copy of of or or access access to to a a project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work work and and you do do not not agree agree to to be be bound bound by by the the terms terms of of this this agreement, agreement, you may may obtain obtain a a refund refund from from the the person person or or entity entity to to whom whom you paid paid the the fee fee as as set set forth forth in in paragraph paragraph 1.e.8. 1.e.8. 1.b. 1.b. "project "project gutenberg" gutenberg" is is a a registered registered trademark. trademark. it it may may only only be be used used on on or or associated associated in in any any way way with with an an electronic electronic work work by by people people who who agree agree to to be be bound bound by by the the terms terms of of this this agreement. agreement. there there are are a a few few things things that that you can can do do with with most most project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works even even without without complying complying with with the the full full terms terms of of this this agreement. agreement. see see paragraph paragraph 1.c 1.c below. below. there there are are a a lot lot of of things things you can can do do with with project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works if if you follow follow the the terms terms of of this this agreement agreement and and help help preserve preserve free free future future access access to to project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works. works. see see paragraph paragraph 1.e 1.e below. below. 1.c. 1.c. the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation ("the ("the foundation" foundation" or or pglaf), pglaf), owns owns a a compilation compilation copyright copyright in in the the collection collection of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works. works. nearly nearly all all the the individual individual works works in in the the collection collection are are in in the the public public domain domain in in the the united united states. states. if if an an individual individual work work is is in in the the public public domain domain in in the the united united states states and and you are are located located in in the the united united states, states, we we do do not not claim claim a a right right to to prevent prevent you from from copying, copying, distributing, distributing, performing, performing, displaying displaying or or creating creating derivative derivative works works based based on on the the work work as as long long as as all all references references to to project project gutenberg gutenberg are are removed. removed. of of course, course, we we hope hope that that you will will support support the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm mission mission of of promoting promoting free free access access to to electronic electronic works works by by freely freely sharing sharing project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm works works in in compliance compliance with with the the terms terms of of this this agreement agreement for for keeping keeping the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm name name associated associated with with the the work. work. you can can easily easily comply comply with with the the terms terms of of this this agreement agreement by by keeping keeping this this work work in in the the same same format format with with its its attached attached full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license when when you share share it it without without charge charge with with others. others. 1.d. 1.d. the the copyright copyright laws laws of of the the place place where where you are are located located also also govern govern what what you can can do do with with this this work. work. copyright copyright laws laws in in most most countries countries are are in in a a constant constant state state of of change. change. if if you are are outside outside the the united united states, states, check check the the laws laws of of your your country country in in addition addition to to the the terms terms of of this this agreement agreement before before downloading, downloading, copying, copying, displaying, displaying, performing, performing, distributing distributing or or creating creating derivative derivative works works based based on on this this work work or or any any other other project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm work. work. the the foundation foundation makes makes no no representations representations concerning concerning the the copyright copyright status status of of any any work work in in any any country country outside outside the the united united states. states. 1.e. 1.e. unless unless you have have removed removed all all references references to to project project gutenberg: gutenberg: 1.e.1. 1.e.1. the the following following sentence, sentence, with with active active links links to, to, or or other other immediate immediate access access to, to, the the full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license must must appear appear prominently prominently whenever whenever any any copy copy of of a a project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm work work (any (any work work on on which which the the phrase phrase "project "project gutenberg" gutenberg" appears, appears, or or with with which which the the phrase phrase "project "project gutenberg" gutenberg" is is associated) associated) is is accessed, accessed, displayed, displayed, performed, performed, viewed, viewed, copied copied or or distributed: distributed: this this ebook ebook is is for for the the use use of of anyone anyone anywhere anywhere at at no no cost cost and and with with almost almost no no restrictions restrictions whatsoever. whatsoever. you may may copy copy it, it, give give it it away away or or re-use re-use it it under under the the terms terms of of the the project project gutenberg gutenberg license license included included with with this this ebook ebook or or online online at at www.gutenberg.org www.gutenberg.org 1.e.2. 1.e.2. if if an an individual individual project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work work is is derived derived from from the the public public domain domain (does (does not not contain contain a a notice notice indicating indicating that that it it is is posted posted with with permission permission of of the the copyright copyright holder), holder), the the work work can can be be copied copied and and distributed distributed to to anyone anyone in in the the united united states states without without paying paying any any fees fees or or charges. charges. if if you are are redistributing redistributing or or providing providing access access to to a a work work with with the the phrase phrase "project "project gutenberg" gutenberg" associated associated with with or or appearing appearing on on the the work, work, you must must comply comply either either with with the the requirements requirements of of paragraphs paragraphs 1.e.1 1.e.1 through through 1.e.7 1.e.7 or or obtain obtain permission permission for for the the use use of of the the work work and and the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm trademark trademark as as set set forth forth in in paragraphs paragraphs 1.e.8 1.e.8 or or 1.e.9. 1.e.9. 1.e.3. 1.e.3. if if an an individual individual project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work work is is posted posted with with the the permission permission of of the the copyright copyright holder, holder, your your use use and and distribution distribution must must comply comply with with both both paragraphs paragraphs 1.e.1 1.e.1 through through 1.e.7 1.e.7 and and any any additional additional terms terms imposed imposed by by the the copyright copyright holder. holder. additional additional terms terms will will be be linked linked to to the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license for for all all works works posted posted with with the the permission permission of of the the copyright copyright holder holder found found at at the the beginning beginning of of this this work. work. 1.e.4. 1.e.4. do do not not unlink unlink or or detach detach or or remove remove the the full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license terms terms from from this this work, work, or or any any files files containing containing a a part part of of this this work work or or any any other other work work associated associated with with project project gutenberg-tm. gutenberg-tm. 1.e.5. 1.e.5. do do not not copy, copy, display, display, perform, perform, distribute distribute or or redistribute redistribute this this electronic electronic work, work, or or any any part part of of this this electronic electronic work, work, without without prominently prominently displaying displaying the the sentence sentence set set forth forth in in paragraph paragraph 1.e.1 1.e.1 with with active active links links or or immediate immediate access access to to the the full full terms terms of of the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license. license. 1.e.6. 1.e.6. you may may convert convert to to and and distribute distribute this this work work in in any any binary, binary, compressed, compressed, marked marked up, up, nonproprietary nonproprietary or or proprietary proprietary form, form, including including any any word word processing processing or or hypertext hypertext form. form. however, however, if if you provide provide access access to to or or distribute distribute copies copies of of a a project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm work work in in a a format format other other than than "plain "plain vanilla vanilla ascii" ascii" or or other other format format used used in in the the official official version version posted posted on on the the official official project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm web web site site (www.gutenberg.org), (www.gutenberg.org), you must, must, at at no no additional additional cost, cost, fee fee or or expense expense to to the the user, user, provide provide a a copy, copy, a a means means of of exporting exporting a a copy, copy, or or a a means means of of obtaining obtaining a a copy copy upon upon request, request, of of the the work work in in its its original original "plain "plain vanilla vanilla ascii" ascii" or or other other form. form. any any alternate alternate format format must must include include the the full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license license as as specified specified in in paragraph paragraph 1.e.1. 1.e.1. 1.e.7. 1.e.7. do do not not charge charge a a fee fee for for access access to, to, viewing, viewing, displaying, displaying, performing, performing, copying copying or or distributing distributing any any project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm works works unless unless you comply comply with with paragraph paragraph 1.e.8 1.e.8 or or 1.e.9. 1.e.9. 1.e.8. 1.e.8. you may may charge charge a a reasonable reasonable fee fee for for copies copies of of or or providing providing access access to to or or distributing distributing project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works provided provided that that - - you pay pay a a royalty royalty fee fee of of 20% 20% of of the the gross gross profits profits you derive derive from from the the use use of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm works works calculated calculated using using the the method method you already already use use to to calculate calculate your your applicable applicable taxes. taxes. the the fee fee is is owed owed to to the the owner owner of of the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm trademark, trademark, but but he he has has agreed agreed to to donate donate royalties royalties under under this this paragraph paragraph to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation. foundation. royalty royalty payments payments must must be be paid paid within within 60 60 days days following following each each date date on on which which you prepare prepare (or (or are are legally legally required required to to prepare) prepare) your your periodic periodic tax tax returns. returns. royalty royalty payments payments should should be be clearly clearly marked marked as as such such and and sent sent to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation at at the the address address specified specified in in section section 4, 4, "information "information about about donations donations to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation." foundation." - - you provide provide a a full full refund refund of of any any money money paid paid by by a a user user who who notifies notifies you in in writing writing (or (or by by e-mail) e-mail) within within 30 30 days days of of receipt receipt that that s/he s/he does does not not agree agree to to the the terms terms of of the the full full project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm license. license. you must must require require such such a a user user to to return return or or destroy destroy all all copies copies of of the the works works possessed possessed in in a a physical physical medium medium and and discontinue discontinue all all use use of of and and all all access access to to other other copies copies of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm works. works. - - you provide, provide, in in accordance accordance with with paragraph paragraph 1.f.3, 1.f.3, a a full full refund refund of of any any money money paid paid for for a a work work or or a a replacement replacement copy, copy, if if a a defect defect in in the the electronic electronic work work is is discovered discovered and and reported reported to to you within within 90 90 days days of of receipt receipt of of the the work. work. - - you comply comply with with all all other other terms terms of of this this agreement agreement for for free free distribution distribution of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm works. works. 1.e.9. 1.e.9. if if you wish wish to to charge charge a a fee fee or or distribute distribute a a project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work work or or group group of of works works on on different different terms terms than than are are set set forth forth in in this this agreement, agreement, you must must obtain obtain permission permission in in writing writing from from both both the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation and and michael michael hart, hart, the the owner owner of of the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm trademark. trademark. contact contact the the foundation foundation as as set set forth forth in in section section 3 3 below. below. 1.f. 1.f. 1.f.1. 1.f.1. project project gutenberg gutenberg volunteers volunteers and and employees employees expend expend considerable considerable effort effort to to identify, identify, do do copyright copyright research research on, on, transcribe transcribe and and proofread proofread public public domain domain works works in in creating creating the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm collection. collection. despite despite these these efforts, efforts, project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works, works, and and the the medium medium on on which which they they may may be be stored, stored, may may contain contain "defects," "defects," such such as, as, but but not not limited limited to, to, incomplete, incomplete, inaccurate inaccurate or or corrupt corrupt data, data, transcription transcription errors, errors, a a copyright copyright or or other other intellectual intellectual property property infringement, infringement, a a defective defective or or damaged damaged disk disk or or other other medium, medium, a a computer computer virus, virus, or or computer computer codes codes that that damage damage or or cannot cannot be be read read by by your your equipment. equipment. 1.f.2. 1.f.2. limited limited warranty, warranty, disclaimer disclaimer of of damages damages - - except except for for the the "right "right of of replacement replacement or or refund" refund" described described in in paragraph paragraph 1.f.3, 1.f.3, the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation, foundation, the the owner owner of of the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm trademark, trademark, and and any any other other party party distributing distributing a a project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic work work under under this this agreement, agreement, disclaim disclaim all all liability liability to to you for for damages, damages, costs costs and and expenses, expenses, including including legal legal fees. fees. you agree agree that that you have have no no remedies remedies for for negligence, negligence, strict strict liability, liability, breach breach of of warranty warranty or or breach breach of of contract contract except except those those provided provided in in paragraph paragraph f3. f3. you agree agree that that the the foundation, foundation, the the trademark trademark owner, owner, and and any any distributor distributor under under this this agreement agreement will will not not be be liable liable to to you for for actual, actual, direct, direct, indirect, indirect, consequential, consequential, punitive punitive or or incidental incidental damages damages even even if if you give give notice notice of of the the possibility possibility of of such such damage. damage. 1.f.3. 1.f.3. limited limited right right of of replacement replacement or or refund refund - - if if you discover discover a a defect defect in in this this electronic electronic work work within within 90 90 days days of of receiving receiving it, it, you can can receive receive a a refund refund of of the the money money (if (if any) any) you paid paid for for it it by by sending sending a a written written explanation explanation to to the the person person you received received the the work work from. from. if if you received received the the work work on on a a physical physical medium, medium, you must must return return the the medium medium with with your your written written explanation. explanation. the the person person or or entity entity that that provided provided you with with the the defective defective work work may may elect elect to to provide provide a a replacement replacement copy copy in in lieu lieu of of a a refund. refund. if if you received received the the work work electronically, electronically, the the person person or or entity entity providing providing it it to to you may may choose choose to to give give you a a second second opportunity opportunity to to receive receive the the work work electronically electronically in in lieu lieu of of a a refund. refund. if if the the second second copy copy is is also also defective, defective, you may may demand demand a a refund refund in in writing writing without without further further opportunities opportunities to to fix fix the the problem. problem. 1.f.4. 1.f.4. except except for for the the limited limited right right of of replacement replacement or or refund refund set set forth forth in in paragraph paragraph 1.f.3, 1.f.3, this this work work is is provided provided to to you 'as-is' 'as-is' with with no no other other warranties warranties of of any any kind, kind, express express or or implied, implied, including including but but not not limited limited to to warranties warranties of of merchantibility merchantibility or or fitness fitness for for any any purpose. purpose. 1.f.5. 1.f.5. some some states states do do not not allow allow disclaimers disclaimers of of certain certain implied implied warranties warranties or or the the exclusion exclusion or or limitation limitation of of certain certain types types of of damages. damages. if if any any disclaimer disclaimer or or limitation limitation set set forth forth in in this this agreement agreement violates violates the the law law of of the the state state applicable applicable to to this this agreement, agreement, the the agreement agreement shall shall be be interpreted interpreted to to make make the the maximum maximum disclaimer disclaimer or or limitation limitation permitted permitted by by the the applicable applicable state state law. law. the the invalidity invalidity or or unenforceability unenforceability of of any any provision provision of of this this agreement agreement shall shall not not void void the the remaining remaining provisions. provisions. 1.f.6. 1.f.6. indemnity indemnity - - you agree agree to to indemnify indemnify and and hold hold the the foundation, foundation, the the trademark trademark owner, owner, any any agent agent or or employee employee of of the the foundation, foundation, anyone anyone providing providing copies copies of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works works in in accordance accordance with with this this agreement, agreement, and and any any volunteers volunteers associated associated with with the the production, production, promotion promotion and and distribution distribution of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works, works, harmless harmless from from all all liability, liability, costs costs and and expenses, expenses, including including legal legal fees, fees, that that arise arise directly directly or or indirectly indirectly from from any any of of the the following following which which you do do or or cause cause to to occur: occur: (a) (a) distribution distribution of of this this or or any any project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm work, work, (b) (b) alteration, alteration, modification, modification, or or additions additions or or deletions deletions to to any any project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm work, work, and and (c) (c) any any defect defect you cause. cause. section section 2. 2. information information about about the the mission mission of of project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm is is synonymous synonymous with with the the free free distribution distribution of of electronic electronic works works in in formats formats readable readable by by the the widest widest variety variety of of computers computers including including obsolete, obsolete, old, old, middle-aged middle-aged and and new new computers. computers. it it exists exists because because of of the the efforts efforts of of hundreds hundreds of of volunteers volunteers and and donations donations from from people people in in all all walks walks of of life. life. volunteers volunteers and and financial financial support support to to provide provide volunteers volunteers with with the the assistance assistance they they need, need, are are critical critical to to reaching reaching project project gutenberg-tm's gutenberg-tm's goals goals and and ensuring ensuring that that the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm collection collection will will remain remain freely freely available available for for generations generations to to come. come. in in 2001, 2001, the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation was was created created to to provide provide a a secure secure and and permanent permanent future future for for project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm and and future future generations. generations. to to learn learn more more about about the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation and and how how your your efforts efforts and and donations donations can can help, help, see see sections sections 3 3 and and 4 4 and and the the foundation foundation web web page page at at http://www.pglaf.org. http://www.pglaf.org. section section 3. 3. information information about about the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation is is a a non non profit profit 501(c)(3) 501(c)(3) educational educational corporation corporation organized organized under under the the laws laws of of the the state state of of mississippi mississippi and and granted granted tax tax exempt exempt status status by by the the internal internal revenue revenue service. service. the the foundation's foundation's ein ein or or federal federal tax tax identification identification number number is is 64-6221541. 64-6221541. its its 501(c)(3) 501(c)(3) letter letter is is posted posted at at http://pglaf.org/fundraising. http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions contributions to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation are are tax tax deductible deductible to to the the full full extent extent permitted permitted by by u.s. u.s. federal federal laws laws and and your your state's state's laws. laws. the the foundation's foundation's principal principal office office is is located located at at 4557 4557 melan melan dr. dr. s. s. fairbanks, fairbanks, ak, ak, 99712., 99712., but but its its volunteers volunteers and and employees employees are are scattered scattered throughout throughout numerous numerous locations. locations. its its business business office office is is located located at at 809 809 north north 1500 1500 west, west, salt salt lake lake city, city, ut ut 84116, 84116, (801) (801) 596-1887, 596-1887, email email business@pglaf.org. business@pglaf.org. email email contact contact links links and and up up to to date date contact contact information information can can be be found found at at the the foundation's foundation's web web site site and and official official page page at at http://pglaf.org http://pglaf.org for for additional additional contact contact information: information: dr. dr. gregory gregory b. b. newby newby chief chief executive executive and and director director gbnewby@pglaf.org gbnewby@pglaf.org section section 4. 4. information information about about donations donations to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation foundation project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm depends depends upon upon and and cannot cannot survive survive without without wide wide spread spread public public support support and and donations donations to to carry carry out out its its mission mission of of increasing increasing the the number number of of public public domain domain and and licensed licensed works works that that can can be be freely freely distributed distributed in in machine machine readable readable form form accessible accessible by by the the widest widest array array of of equipment equipment including including outdated outdated equipment. equipment. many many small small donations donations ($1 ($1 to to $5,000) $5,000) are are particularly particularly important important to to maintaining maintaining tax tax exempt exempt status status with with the the irs. irs. the the foundation foundation is is committed committed to to complying complying with with the the laws laws regulating regulating charities charities and and charitable charitable donations donations in in all all 50 50 states states of of the the united united states. states. compliance compliance requirements requirements are are not not uniform uniform and and it it takes takes a a considerable considerable effort, effort, much much paperwork paperwork and and many many fees fees to to meet meet and and keep keep up up with with these these requirements. requirements. we we do do not not solicit solicit donations donations in in locations locations where where we we have have not not received received written written confirmation confirmation of of compliance. compliance. to to send send donations donations or or determine determine the the status status of of compliance compliance for for any any particular particular state state visit visit http://pglaf.org http://pglaf.org while while we we cannot cannot and and do do not not solicit solicit contributions contributions from from states states where where we we have have not not met met the the solicitation solicitation requirements, requirements, we we know know of of no no prohibition prohibition against against accepting accepting unsolicited unsolicited donations donations from from donors donors in in such such states states who who approach approach us us with with offers offers to to donate. donate. international international donations donations are are gratefully gratefully accepted, accepted, but but we we cannot cannot make make any any statements statements concerning concerning tax tax treatment treatment of of donations donations received received from from outside outside the the united united states. states. u.s. u.s. laws laws alone alone swamp swamp our our small small staff. staff. please please check check the the project project gutenberg gutenberg web web pages pages for for current current donation donation methods methods and and addresses. addresses. donations donations are are accepted accepted in in a a number number of of other other ways ways including including checks, checks, online online payments payments and and credit credit card card donations. donations. to to donate, donate, please please visit: visit: http://pglaf.org/donate http://pglaf.org/donate section section 5. 5. general general information information about about project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm electronic electronic works. works. professor professor michael michael s. s. hart hart is is the the originator originator of of the the project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm concept concept of of a a library library of of electronic electronic works works that that could could be be freely freely shared shared with with anyone. anyone. for for thirty thirty years, years, he he produced produced and and distributed distributed project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm ebooks ebooks with with only only a a loose loose network network of of volunteer volunteer support. support. project project gutenberg-tm gutenberg-tm ebooks ebooks are are often often created created from from several several printed printed editions, editions, all all of of which which are are confirmed confirmed as as public public domain domain in in the the u.s. u.s. unless unless a a copyright copyright notice notice is is included. included. thus, thus, we we do do not not necessarily necessarily keep keep ebooks ebooks in in compliance compliance with with any any particular particular paper paper edition. edition. most most people people start start at at our our web web site site which which has has the the main main pg pg search search facility: facility: http://www.gutenberg.org http://www.gutenberg.org this this web web site site includes includes information information about about project project gutenberg-tm, gutenberg-tm, including including how how to to make make donations donations to to the the project project gutenberg gutenberg literary literary archive archive foundation, foundation, how how to to help help produce produce our our new new ebooks, ebooks, and and how how to to subscribe subscribe to to our our email email newsletter newsletter to to hear hear about about new new ebooks. ebooks. 